GOOD EVENING AND WELCOME
TO THE OCTOBER 23 WORK SESSION
OF THE CITY COUNCIL MR. HONI, I
BELIEVE WE HAVE A PRESENTATION
TONIGHT ON HOUSING AND
HOMELESSNESS.
>> I'LL TURN IT OVER TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
YES, THIS IS THE SPECIAL
MEETING THAT SEVERAL OF YOU
ASKED FOR.
YOU WILL RECALL WE STARTED OUT
IT WAS GOING TO BE A SESSION
FOCUSING SOLELY ON HOUSING AND
THEN HOMELESSNESS WAS ADDED AT
SOME POINT AFTER THE FACT.
SO WE'RE COMBINING THEM.
I WILL REMIND YOU THAT WE HAVE
TO HAVE A HARD STOP AT EIGHT
FORTY FIVE FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> YOU WON'T TAKE THAT LONG SO
WE'LL GET TO THAT BEFORE EIGHT
FORTY FIVE.
THIS IS ALSO THE FIFTH OF OUR
FIVE STRAIGHT MEETINGS IN A ROW
LIMPING AS WE ARE WE'RE HERE
OUR NEXT QUASI WORK SESSION
WILL BE DECEMBER THE 11TH AND
ON THE 11TH WE'RE GOING TO DO
THE PROGRAM THAT EVENING IN TWO
PHASES.
SO PHASE ONE WILL BE CITY STAFF
AND SO YOU'LL HEAR FROM JOHN
FORNIER TALKING ABOUT THE
RESEARCH WE'VE BEEN DOING ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, CUSTOMER
SERVICE, THAT SORT OF THING
WILL ALSO HAVE PUBLIC SERVICES
TALKING ABOUT A WATER STRATEGIC
PLAN THAT THEY'VE BEEN WORKING
ON.
MR. STEIGLITZ AND ONE OF HIS
ASSOCIATES AND THEN OUR STEVE
CLARK WILL BE SPEAKING TO YOU
ABOUT THE PREPARATION WE ARE
DOING FOR THE UPCOMING
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION CYCLE.
BE A LOT OF ATTENTION FOCUSED
ON THAT NEXT YEAR WE'LL TAKE A
BREAK AND THEN WE'LL COME BACK
AND THEN INVITE THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN TO COME TO THE
PODIUM TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT THE
PLANNING PROCESS THEY ARE GOING
THROUGH LAYING OUT THEIR VISION
FOR THE NEXT SEVERAL YEARS.
ALSO TOUCHING UPON THINGS WHERE
THERE'S SOME INTERSECTION
POINTS BETWEEN THE CITY AND THE
UNIVERSITY.
SO THAT'LL BE THE EVENING ON
DECEMBER THE 11TH AND THEN WE
WILL NOT HAVE A WORK SESSION
AGAIN UNTIL PROBABLY SOMETIME
IN FEBRUARY AND WE'LL COME BACK
TO YOU WITH MORE INFORMATION AS
IT TAKES SHAPE.
>> SO AT THIS POINT WE'LL BRING
UP JENNIFER HALL MESS HALL.
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THE HOUSING
PORTION AND THEN SHE WILL
FACILITATE THE REST OF THE
PRESENTATION LEADING INTO
HOMELESSNESS AND QUESTIONS
GOING OR QUESTIONS AT THE END
PLEASE.
THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU.
MAYOR PRO TEM AND CITY COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
I WILL BE DOING THE BULK OF THE
HOUSING SESSION.
AMANDA CARLISLE WITH THE
WASHINGTON HOUSING ALLIANCE.
WE'RE DOING WELL TO BE DOING A
PRESENTATION IN DAN KELLY WHO
IS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE SHELTER ASSOCIATION IS
AVAILABLE FOR QUESTIONS AT THE
END AS WELL.
WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS GIVE A
LOT OF BACKGROUND INFORMATION,
SOME OF WHICH YOU MAY HAVE SEEN
BUT WANTED TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ALL STARTED AT THE SAME PLACE
AND THAT INFORMATION AVAILABLE
TO THE PUBLIC IF THEY ARE ALSO
INTERESTED AND THEN I'M GOING
TO GO INTO SOME REALLY IN DEPTH
INFORMATION ABOUT HOUSING AND
THEN AMANDA IS GOING TO DO HER
PRESENTATION AND HOPEFULLY
WE'LL DO THE QUESTIONS AT THE
END.
WE HOPE TO LEAVE A GOOD AMOUNT
OF TIME FOR THAT.
>> SO WHAT'S THE DEFINITION
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS
HOUSING THE MOST OFTEN IS
DEFINED AS PAYING LESS THAN 30
PERCENT OF YOUR HOUSING COSTS
ON YOUR HOUSING?
IT DOESN'T MATTER IF YOU'RE
OWNER OR RENTER AND IT DOESN'T
MATTER WHAT YOUR INCOME IS BUT
OBVIOUSLY THE LOWER YOUR INCOME
IS THE BIGGER THE BURDEN IS.
ONCE YOU PAY 30 PERCENT OF YOUR
INCOME THERE'S NOT A LOT LEFT
OVER TO PAY THE REST OF YOUR
YOUR COSTS.
ONE OF THE MORE NEWER
DEFINITIONS IS TO ADD IN
TRANSPORTATION.
SO A COMMUNITY LIKE ANN ARBOR
WHERE IT'S VERY EXPENSIVE IF
YOU HAVE TO TRAVEL THEN YOU
ALSO HAVE MORE HOUSING OR
TRANSPORTATION COSTS IF YOU ADD
THE TWO TOGETHER, IF IT EXCEEDS
FORTY FIVE PERCENT
OF YOUR
INCOME THEN IT'S CONSIDERED
COST BURDENED.
JUST A REMINDER ANN ARBOR
PRIMARY STATISTICAL AREA
INCLUDES ALL OF WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND THE MEDIAN INCOME
FAMILY MEDIAN INCOME IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE IS ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FOUR THOUSAND DOLLARS.
THAT'S A SIGNIFICANT INCREASE
THE LAST TWO YEARS ARE BOTH
GONE UP SIGNIFICANTLY COMPARED
TO IN THE PAST THE 60 PERCENT
RMI WHICH IS HIGHLIGHTED IS
MOST OF THE CITY'S PROGRAMS ARE
TARGETED AT 60 PERCENT.
AM I THE DAY IS AT 50 PERCENT
AND MY VOUCHERS ALSO ARE 50
PERCENT.
BUT THERE'S SOME OTHER HUD
PROGRAMS THAT LIMIT INCOMES TO
80 PERCENT.
AM I AND IF YOU TAKE THIS
INFORMATION, THE ONLY NUMBER
THAT'S REAL IN HERE IS THE ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOUR
THOUSAND.
THE REST IS A FORMULA
REGARDLESS OF THE HOUSEHOLD
SIZE.
THAT'S JUST A FORMULA FOR EVERY
OTHER BOX YOU SEE.
BUT IF YOU TAKE 30 PERCENT
OF THESE INCOMES AND YOU LOOK
AT THAT AS A HOUSING COST,
THESE ARE THE HOUSING COST THAT
WE GENERALLY SPEAKING IN THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WORLD ARE
TRYING NOT TO EXCEED.
SO IF YOU LOOK AT 60 PERCENT
AIMI, YOU CAN WORK YOUR WAY
ACROSS FROM ONE PERSON TO A
FIVE PERSON HOUSEHOLD TO SEE
WHAT THOSE MAXIMUM HOUSING
COSTS ARE.
PEOPLE ARE OFTEN SURPRISED TO
SEE HOW HIGH THEY ARE BUT WE
HAVE A VERY HIGH INCOME AND
THAT IS WHY WHAT IS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING ALL OF THESE ARE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WHEN YOU
HAVE ANY KIND OF RESTRICTED
INCOMES OR YOU CAN HAVE SENIOR
HOUSING THAT DOESN'T RESTRICTED
INCOMES BUT IS RESTRICTED BY
AGE BUT YOU CAN ALSO HAVE
NATURALLY OCCURRING HOUSING IN
THE MARKETPLACE UNLIKELY IN ANN
ARBOR BUT IN OTHER COMMUNITIES
WHERE THERE'S NO RESTRICTIONS
BUT THE HOUSING IS REASONABLY
PRICED TO REMIND FOLKS OF THE
ANAMBRA HOUSING COMMISSION WE
OWN 20 DIFFERENT PROPERTIES AND
WE HAVE FIVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
FOUR APARTMENTS.
WE HAVE A FAIRLY LARGE VOUCHER
PROGRAM OVER 2000 VOUCHERS.
WE ALSO HAVE A FAMILY
SELF-SUFFICIENCY PROGRAM WHERE
WE HELP FOLKS THEY VOLUNTARILY
CAN PARTICIPATE AND WE HELP
THEM TO BECOME SELF-SUFFICIENT
AND WE ALSO HAVE A
HOMEOWNERSHIP PROGRAM WHICH I
THINK I JUST FOUND OUT WE HAVE
18 KEEN HOMEOWNERS RIGHT NOW
AND THE HOMEOWNERSHIP PROGRAM
IS WHERE YOUR VOUCHER INSTEAD
PAYING YOUR RENT AND ENDS UP
PAYING YOUR MORTGAGE AND TAXES
.
WHERE ARE OUR HOUSING?
WHERE IS THE HOUSING COMMISSION
HOUSING DISTRIBUTED?
HERE'S A MAP.
THIS ISN'T REPRESENTATIVE
OF EVERY AFFORDABLE HOUSING
PROJECT IN THE CITY, JUST THE
HOUSING THAT THE HOUSING
COMMISSION OWNS AND MANAGES.
BUT IT'S PRETTY CONCENTRATED
WHEN YOU ADD IN THE CO-OPS WHEN
YOU ADD IN AVALON HOUSING
MICHIGAN ABILITY PARTNERS THE
PLACE WHERE THERE IS NOT VERY
MUCH AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS
ACTUALLY MOSTLY IN WARD TWO,
SOMEWHAT IN WARD ONE AS WELL.
THIS IS A SLIDE THAT WASHINGTON
COUNTY PRESENTED AND LET ME
BORROW THIS IS SHOWING ALL THE
HOUSING UNITS IN THE COUNTY
FROM TWENTY TWELVE TO TWENTY
TWENTY ONE.
IN THAT TIME THE COUNTY GAINED
TEN THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND
TWENTY SIX UNITS.
THE BOTTOM SECTION THE LIGHT
BLUE IS VACANT HOUSING UNITS
THE ORANGE IS RENTAL THEN YOU
HAVE THOSE WITH A MORTGAGE AND
THOSE WITHOUT A MORTGAGE AND A
YELLOW LINE CUTTING THROUGH THE
BLUE LINE ARE THE RESTRICTED
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS SO
THOSE HOUSING UNITS THAT HAVE A
RESTRICTION UP TO 60 PERCENT AM
I AND IT'S SOME COW DEEDED OR
SOME KIND OF AGREEMENT.
SO YOU CAN SEE THERE'S ACTUALLY
FEWER RESTRICTED AFFORDABLE
UNITS THAN VACANT THE
AFFORDABLE UNITS REPRESENT A
LITTLE BIT LESS THAN THREE
PERCENT OF ALL THE HOUSING
UNITS IN THE COUNTY WHEN WE
LOOK AT OUR VOUCHER PROGRAM,
VOUCHER IS CALLED THE HOUSING
CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAM WHICH IS
INTENDED TO ENABLE PEOPLE TO
MOVE INTO NEIGHBORHOODS THAT
THEY DESIRE TO MOVE IN WHETHER
IT'S BECAUSE WHERE THEY LIVE OR
WHERE THEIR KIDS GO TO SCHOOL
OR WHERE THEY HAVE A JOB, WHERE
THEIR SERVICES, WHERE THERE'S
TRANSIT BUT INEVITABLY WHAT
HAPPENS IS FOLKS END UP MOSTLY
LIVING IN URBAN AREAS AND IN
OUR COUNTY EVEN THOUGH WHERE
THE ANAMBRA HOUSING COMMISSION
MOST OF OUR VOUCHERS ARE
ACTUALLY UTILIZED IN THE CITY
OF IPSI AND IPSE TOWNSHIP
BECAUSE THAT IS WHERE THERE IS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO BE RENTED
WITHIN THE LIMITED AMOUNT THAT
A VOUCHER CAN SUBSIDIZE
.
>> SO HOW ARE LOW INCOME
RESIDENTS IMPACTED BY THIS
HOUSING MARKET?
WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT'S CALLED
FAIR MARKET RENTS, WHICH IS A
HUD TERMINOLOGY AND THEY
CALCULATE IT EVERY YEAR AND
IT'S BASED ON THE FORTIETH
PERCENTILE OF ALL RENTAL UNITS
IN YOUR HOUSING MARKET THEY DO
NOT INCLUDE NEWLY CONSTRUCTED
UNITS WITHIN THE LAST TWO YEARS
AND THEY DO NOT INCLUDE
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING.
AND SO THIS IS A GRAPH SHOWING
THE INCREASE OVER TIME FOR A
ONE BEDROOM AND A TWO BEDROOM
WITH FAIR MARKET RENTS AND YOU
CAN SEE A REALLY HIGH INCREASE
BOTH FROM TWENTY TWO TO TWENTY
THREE AS WELL AS TWENTY TO
TWENTY ONE OVER TEN PERCENT
INCREASE.
SO YOU KNEW THIS BECAUSE I HAVE
A MAP I'D LIKE TO SHOW YOU.
SO THERE'S A FEDERAL POVERTY
LEVEL WHICH IS DIFFERENT AND
NOT RELATED TO THE AREA MEDIAN
INCOME BECAUSE IT'S ACROSS THE
WHOLE UNITED STATES AND SO FOR
INDIVIDUAL THAT'S FOURTEEN
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY ET CETERA.
THIS REPRESENTS FOR OUR
COMMUNITY ABOUT TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE PERCENT OF AMAI.
SO IN OTHER COMMUNITIES IT
MIGHT BE 50 PERCENT AM I OR 40
PERCENT AM I.
AND SO WHEN YOU LOOK AT A MAP
OF HIGH POVERTY LEVELS BY
CENSUS TRACT THIS IS WITH THE
MAP LOOKS LIKE AND WHAT DOES IT
MEAN TO HAVE HIGH POVERTY
CENSUS TRACT IF THERE'S A
POVERTY RATE OF TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT OR MORE OR IF MORE THAN
HALF THE HOUSEHOLDS HAVE
INCOMES 60 PERCENT AM I OR
LESS.
AND SO THERE'S ONE THING YOU
MAY NOTICE ABOUT THIS MAP WE'RE
INTERACTIVE IS THAT YOU ASK
QUESTIONS ABOUT THAT BUT IT'S
SOMEWHAT OBVIOUS WHICH IS THE
PRIMARY PURPLE AREA IN THE
CENTER OF THE MAP IS REALLY THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND
AROUND THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AS WELL AS WHEN YOU
LOOK AT YPSILANTI THERE'S AN
AREA AROUND WASHTENAW COMMUNITY
COLLEGE AND AMMU AND SO WHEN
YOU REMOVE STUDENTS FROM THOSE
MAPS YOU CAN SEE IN ANN ARBOR
MOST OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE IN
POVERTY SELF IDENTIFIED BY THE
CENSUS WHEN SOMEBODY COMES TO
YOUR HOUSE AND ASKS YOU IN YOUR
HOUSEHOLD WHAT YOUR INCOME IS
AND YOU SAY I MAKE FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS A YEAR MY
SUMMER JOB BUT I I'M A STUDENT.
YOU ARE IN POVERTY.
SO WHEN I LIKE TO LOOK AT WHERE
ARE REAL LOW INCOME CENSUS
TRACTS I DON'T USE POVERTY.
>> I INSTEAD LOOK AT PERCENT
OF HOUSEHOLDS ON PUBLIC
ASSISTANCE AND SO YOU CAN SEE
THAT THAT REMOVES MOST OF THOSE
CENSUS TRACTS THAT ARE IN
AROUND THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND IT ACTUALLY
SHOWS EVEN MORE CONCENTRATION
ON THE EAST SIDE OF THE COUNTY
PRIMARILY IPSI CITY, IPSI
TOWNSHIP, PARTS OF SUPERIOR
TOWNSHIP.
BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR, THE AREA WITH THE
HIGHEST CONCENTRATION IS IN AND
AROUND BRYANT SCHOOL.
THERE'S A COUPLE OF CO-OPS IN
THAT AREA AND A COUPLE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS
JUST NORTH OF THAT AS WELL AS
MORE CO-OPS IN THAT CORNER
OF THE CITY ON THE FAR WEST
SIDE IS THE CENSUS TRACT THAT
THE ANAPRA HOUSING COMMISSION
HAS A PROPERTY AS WELL AS
AVALON AS WELL AS MICHIGAN
ABILITY PARTNERS.
THERE'S ANOTHER CO-OP IN ON THE
NORTHERN SIDE THAT PARTICULAR
CENSUS TRACT IS WHERE JUST
BLANKED ON THE NAME PARKWAY
MEADOWS IS WHICH IS THE LARGEST
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING AREA PROJECT
IN THE CITY
.
ONE OF THE MAJOR IMPACTS NOT
JUST IN ANN ARBOR BUT
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY IS THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
YOU CAN SEE THE CITIES
ENROLLMENT AT THE TOP AND ARBOR
AND THE RED AND THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN'S ENROLLMENT IN THE
BLUE AND YOU CAN SEE A PARALLEL
TRACK GOING UP.
THIS IS JUST THE SHOWING THE
ENROLLMENT AND THEN IT COMPARES
IT TO THE ON CAMPUS HOUSING
THAT UNIVERSITY PROVIDES AND AS
THE UNIVERSITY GROWS, IT'S NOT
JUST STUDENTS THAT IMPACT THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S EVERYONE THAT THE
UNIVERSITY HIRES THAT SUPPORTS
THOSE STUDENTS AND
ADMINISTRATION.
THIS IS SHOWING MAJOR AREA
EMPLOYERS.
YOU CAN SEE THE UNIVERSITY IS
BY FAR THE LARGEST EMPLOYER
MORE THAN THE NEXT TWENTY
EMPLOYERS SO IT'S AN OUTSIZE
IMPACT ON ANN ARBOR BUT IT ALSO
IMPACTS THE REST OF THE COUNTY
.
THE GOOD NEWS IS AS YOU KNOW,
THE UNIVERSITY IS ABOUT TO
BUILD THOUSANDS OF NEW DORMS
UNITS FOR THEIR STUDENTS WHICH
IS WONDERFUL.
IT'S GOING TO HAVE A POSITIVE
IMPACT I THINK ON THE
MARKETPLACE ONCE THEY'RE ABLE
TO DO THAT WHEN YOU HEAR FROM
YOUR CONSTITUENTS ABOUT THE
TRAFFIC AND THEY COMPLAIN ABOUT
ADDING HOUSING IN A PARTICULAR
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE IMPACT ON
TRAFFIC, MOST OF THE TRAFFIC IS
ACTUALLY FROM PEOPLE WHO DON'T
ACTUALLY LIVE IN THE CITY.
THEY'RE ACTUALLY COMMUTING INTO
THE CITY FOR THEIR JOBS AS
OPPOSED TO PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE
AND WORK HERE OR LIVE HERE AND
COMMUTE OUT OF THE CITY FOR
THEIR JOB
.
AND WE'RE HEARING ANECDOTALLY
FROM AND YOU PROBABLY ARE AS
WELL FROM VARIOUS EMPLOYERS WHO
HAVE A HARD TIME HIRING PEOPLE
BECAUSE OF THE DIFFICULTY IN
THE HOUSING MARKET BACK IN
TWENTY TWENTY WE DID A HOUSING
NEEDS ASSESSMENT.
WE ONLY COVERED THE AREA IN THE
DOWNTOWN THAT IS WEST OF ST.
STREET.
SO WE WERE TRYING TO AVOID THE
HIGHLY CONCENTRATED STUDENT
AREA AND JUST CONCENTRATE ON
WHAT IS MORE OF OUR OUR
DOWNTOWN OF THE CITY AND THIS
IS WHAT THEY FOUND THOUSANDS
OF DEMAND FOR ADDITIONAL UNITS
AND A VARIETY OF INCOME RANGES
.
WE ARE ACTUALLY APPLYING FOR A
HUD GRANT WITH THE CITY
PLANNING DEPARTMENT AND THE
CITY OF YPSILANTI.
IT'S CALLED A HUD PROGRAM AND
IT'S TO LOOK AT BOTH REGULATORY
BARRIERS TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AS WELL AS PROVIDE FUNDING FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE AND DEVELOPMENT.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS WE'D LIKE
TO DO IS UPDATE THIS NEEDS
ASSESSMENT BUT TO COVER THE
REST OF THE CITY.
SO IF THERE'S SUCH A HUGE
DEMAND FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING,
WHY ISN'T THE PRIVATE SECTOR
BUILDING IT?
I'VE USED THE SLIDE FOR
PROBABLY TEN YEARS AND IT'S
WORTH NOW THAN IT'S EVER BEEN
OUT IN THE MARKETPLACE IS AS
THE EXPENSE OF BUILDING.
THERE'S NO WAY TO DO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING WITH SOME WITHOUT SOME
KIND OF SUBSIDY WHETHER THAT'S
LOW OR LOW COST LAND, WHETHER
THAT'S ACTUAL CASH GRANTS,
WHETHER THAT'S LOW INTEREST
LOANS OR A COMBINATION OF THOSE
JUST TO UNDERSTAND WHAT IT
MEANS TO DO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
VERSUS MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENT
,THE COSTS ARE VIRTUALLY THE
SAME.
SO WE UNLESS WE'RE GETTING FREE
CITY LAND OR REDUCED COSTS LAND
WE ARE NOT PAYING ANY DIFFERENT
THAN ANYBODY ELSE IN THE
MARKETPLACE.
OUR ARCHITECTS DON'T CHARGE US
LESS.
OUR ENGINEERS DON'T CHARGE US
LESS CHARGE LESS.
OUR CONSTRUCTION COSTS ARE THE
SAME.
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
OF DIFFERENCES IN SOME OF THE
SOFT COSTS BUT VIRTUALLY THE
COSTS ARE THE SAME REGARDLESS
OF WHAT TYPE OF HOUSING YOU'RE
BUILDING.
>> THE BIGGEST DIFFERENCE IS
HOW YOU FINANCE THE HOUSING
ITSELF.
THE MARKET RATE SIDE.
THIS IS THIS IS A BROAD
GENERALIZATION ROUGHLY ABOUT 20
PERCENT TENDS TO BE FROM EQUITY
AND THEN ABOUT 80 PERCENT COMES
FROM A LOAN FROM YOUR
TRADITIONAL LENDING
INSTITUTIONS.
THE BIGGEST SOURCE OF FINANCING
FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS LOW
INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDITS,
WHICH IS NOT A HUD PROGRAM.
IT'S AN IRS PROGRAM AND IT'S
KIND OF FLIPPED IN BACK WHEN I
FIRST CREATED THIS SLIDE ABOUT
60 PERCENT OF THE FUNDING FOR
TAX CREDIT FUNDED PROJECTS WERE
ROUGHLY FROM TAX CREDIT EQUITY
AND THEN THE REST WAS ALONE.
THE LOWER YOUR INCOME TARGET IS
YOU CAN'T TAKE OUT AS BIG OF A
LOAN AND SO YOU HAVE TO GET
GRANTS BECAUSE YOUR LOAN HAS TO
GET PAID BACK WITH RENTS AND
YOUR RENTS ARE RESTRICTED BY
THE INCOME YOU'RE TARGETING.
WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE WHEN
YOU GET TO THE OPERATIONS?
THIS IS WHY YOU SEE MORE MARKET
RATE THAN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BUILT.
IT IS WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
RENTS THE RENTS HAVE TO PAY
BACK HAS TO PAY FOR OPERATIONS
WHICH IS ACTUALLY A SMALL PART
OF THE COSTS.
IF YOU LOOK AT THOSE COSTS I DO
HAVE AN INCREASED COST ON THE
AFFORDABLE WE HAVE HIGHER
REGULATORY BURDENS AND SO WE
END UP HAVING MORE STAFFING BUT
THE MAJORITY OF A PROJECT RENT
GOES TOWARD DEBT SO YOU HAVE TO
TAKE A LOAN, YOU GOT TO PAY IT
BACK JUST LIKE IF YOU HAVE A
MORTGAGE FOR YOUR HOUSE.
AND THEN THE OTHER BIG
DIFFERENCE IS TAXES.
THE MARKET RATE UNITS HAVE TO
PAY TAXES.
WE HAVE A ONE DOLLAR PER UNIT
PILOT AND SO WE HAVE VIRTUALLY
NO TAXES AND SO THAT MAKES A
BIG DIFFERENCE ON THE WHERE
YOUR OPERATING COSTS GO TO.
>> ONE THING PEOPLE TEND TO BE
SURPRISED ABOUT IS WHERE
SUBSIDY COMES FROM FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AS WELL AS
WHAT IS THE LARGEST SOURCE
OF SUBSIDY FOR HOUSING.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE CHART ON THE
LEFT FROM TWENTY FIFTEEN THIS
IS NOT A CHART I CREATED .
IT WAS CREATED BY THE CENTER ON
BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES.
THEY LOOKED AT ALL THE FEDERAL
SUBSIDIES THAT HELP HOMEOWNERS
AND ALL THE FEDERAL SUBSIDIES
THAT HELP RENTAL RENTERS.
AND SO YOU CAN SEE ON THE LEFT
PRIMARILY THAT WAS MORTGAGE
INTEREST DEDUCTION AND REAL
ESTATE TAX DEDUCTION WHEN
PRESIDENT CHANGE THE TAX
CODE AND INCREASE THE STANDARD
DEDUCTION, THAT MEANT THAT MANY
OF US INCLUDING MYSELF INSTEAD
OF DOING ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS I
TAKE A STANDARD DEDUCTION AND
SO IT'S HARDER TO TRACK TODAY
WHAT THE HOMEOWNER SUBSIDY IS
BECAUSE IT'S JUST LUMPED IN AS
A STANDARD DEDUCTION AND THAT'S
WHY I DON'T HAVE A MORE UPDATED
NUMBER.
BUT WHEN YOU COMPARE IT IN 2015
TO THE EIGHT LOW INCOME HOUSING
TAX CREDIT PUBLIC HOUSING
PROGRAMS THAT ARE FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ON THE
RENTAL SIDE IT WAS LESS THAN
HALF OF THAT THAN THE HOMEOWNER
SIDE AND THAT HAS BEEN A LONG
TERM FEDERAL POLICY GOING BACK
DECADES THAT HOMEOWNERS ARE
MUCH MORE SUBSIDIZED THAN
RENTAL RENTAL PROPERTIES.
WHEN WE DO OUR DEVELOPMENTS I
MENTIONED LOW INCOME HOUSING
TAX CREDITS PRIOR TO THE CITY'S
MILLAGE GETTING ADOPTED.
THESE WERE THE FUNDING SOURCES
THAT I HAD TO GO OUT AND RAISE
MYSELF TO REDEVELOP OUR PUBLIC
HOUSING WHEN WE CHANGED IT FROM
PUBLIC HOUSING TO PROJECT-BASED
VOUCHERS.
SO THIS IS A TYPICAL PROBABLY A
LITTLE LESS TYPICAL THAN SOME
COMMUNITIES BUT TYPICAL IN THAT
YOU HAVE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
FUNDING SOURCES.
MOST COMMUNITIES DO NOT PROVIDE
GENERAL FUNDS LIKE THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR HAS GENEROUSLY
DONE.
MOST COMMUNITIES DON'T HAVE A
DENHA THAT PROVIDES FUNDING AND
SO TYPICALLY A COMMUNITY WOULD
USE OR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPER USE TAX CREDITS.
THEY TAKE OUT LOANS THEY MIGHT
HAVE A FEW HUD GRANT WHICH YOU
CAN SEE IS VERY TINY FROM THE
BIG PICTURE BLOCK GRANT FUNDS
AND OTHER TYPES OF FUNDING
SOURCES GO AHEAD.
THREE YEARS FROM WHEN I
CREATED THAT LAST SLIDE AND
HERE WE ARE WITH THE ACTUAL
PROJECT ON THE TABLE THAT WE
ARE GETTING VERY CLOSE TO
CLOSING OUR FINANCING.
WE STILL HAVEN'T SECURED ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THESE
SOURCES BUT THESE ARE THE THIS
IS WHAT THE CAPITAL STACK LOOKS
LIKE.
I'VE NEVER HAD THIS MANY
SOURCES ANY PROJECT BEFORE AND
THAT'S BECAUSE THE COSTS KEEP
INCREASING SUPPLY SIDE LACK
OF LABOR, INCREASED INTEREST
RATES AND SO I'M HAVING TO
RAISE MORE AND MORE FUNDS FOR
THE SAME PROJECT THAT I COULD
HAVE DONE FOR, YOU KNOW, ONE
THIRD LESS OR HALF AS MUCH FIVE
YEARS AGO.
THANKFULLY THE CITY DID ADOPT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING MILEAGE JUST
AS A REMINDER THAT'S WHAT THE
BALLOT LANGUAGE LOOKS LIKE AND
THAT IS WHAT'S KEEPING MY
PROJECT AFLOAT BECAUSE IF WE
DIDN'T HAVE THAT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING, I DO NOT KNOW HOW I
WOULD GET THIS PROJECT FUNDED
FRANKLY WITH ALL THOSE
DIFFERENT FUNDING SOURCES.
SO WHAT I WHAT IS THE STRATEGY
FOR THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
MILLAGE?
BASICALLY WHAT I DO IS I COME
UP WITH A BUDGET DURING THE
ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS.
I MAKE SURE I LOOK AT THE
PROJECTS WE HAVE IN THE
PIPELINE AND I ALSO TRY TO PAY
ATTENTION TO OTHER ENTITIES AS
WELL.
I BEEN TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW
TO BUILD IN FLEXIBILITY SO WE
CAN ACQUIRE PROPERTIES THAT
MIGHT COME ON THE MARKET
UNEXPECTEDLY SUCH AS THE SIX
UNIT ACQUISITION THAT WE DID A
YEAR AGO NOT EVEN A YEAR AGO
THIS YEAR.
>> IT'S HARD THOUGH BECAUSE IF
YOU DON'T THE OWNER AND YOU
DON'T HAVE CASH READY TO
COMPETE WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR
,IT'S VERY CHALLENGING TO
ACQUIRE PROPERTIES AND WE'RE IN
THE PROCESS OF WORKING WITH THE
HOUSING AND HUMAN SERVICES
ADVISORY BOARD TO COME UP WITH
A APPLICATION PROCESS FOR NON
HOUSING COMMISSION OR A
NONPROFIT IN POSSIBLY FOR
PROFIT ENTITIES ARE DOING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO BE ABLE
TO APPLY FOR FUNDS.
SO WHERE ARE THE CITIES
PROPERTIES THAT WE DID AN
ANALYSIS ON?
HERE IS A MAP.
THE MAJORITY OF THEM ARE IN THE
DOWNTOWN BUT NOT ALL OF THEM
WHICH IS WHY WE DID THAT
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA A COUPLE OF YEARS
AGO.
I WANT TO TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT SOME OF THE HISTORICAL
CITY POLICY SUCCESSES FOR THOSE
WHO HAVE NOT BEEN AROUND FOR 30
YEARS LIKE ME, THE LOOKING AT
CITY OWNED PROPERTIES, THERE'S
A VERY BIG SIGNIFICANT POLICY
INITIATIVE THAT THE CITY TOOK
HUGE IMPACT FOR THE HOUSING
HUGE IMPACT PAYMENT IN LIEU
OF TAXES.
WE HAVE THE LOWEST I'VE EVER
SEEN IN THE UNITED STATES.
THERE MIGHT BE OTHERS LIKE US.
I JUST HAVEN'T MET THEM YET.
LOTS OF DIFFERENT ZONING
CHANGES OVER THE YEARS AND I
KNOW THE CITY COUNCIL HAS BEEN
LOOKING AT INCREASED DENSITY BY
RATE INCREASE DENSITY FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT DENSITY
ETC. THE FINANCIAL SUPPORT
THERE ARE OTHERS EITHER
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OR DEEDS
THAT DO PROVIDE FINANCIAL
SUPPORT BUT NOT BUILT INTO
THEIR BUDGET LIKE OURS.
BROWNFIELD FINANCING,
BROWNFIELD GRANTS AND VERY
SMALL BUT IT IS THERE REDUCED
FEES FOR PLANNING AND
ZONING.
THE CURRENT DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES WE TALKED ABOUT COST
OF CONSTRUCTION, HIGH INSURANCE
RATES, CITY CODE THE CITY'S
CODES ARE WELL KNOWN TO BE
HIGHER AND MORE DIFFICULT TO
MEET THAN OTHER COMMUNITIES.
THERE'S CITY FEES THAT ARE IN
EXCESS OF OTHER COMMUNITIES.
THERE'S THIS IS GENERIC TO ANY
COMMUNITY HYPER LOCAL COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT AND NIMBYISM AND
THEN ALL THOSE FUNDING SOURCES
THAT YOU SAW FOR CATHERINE THEY
EACH HAVE THEIR OWN
REGULATIONS.
THEY EACH HAVE THEIR OWN
ONGOING AND IMMEDIATE
REGULATIONS WHETHER THAT'S ON
WHAT A UNIT NEEDS TO LOOK LIKE,
WHETHER THAT'S HOW YOU INCOME
CERTIFY A TENANT, IT CAN BE
VERY DIFFERENT ALL KINDS
OF DIFFERENT ONGOING REGULATORY
REQUIREMENTS.
WE EVEN HAVE DIFFERENT
INSPECTIONS RIGHT NOW I HAVE
FIVE DIFFERENT INSPECTORS FOR
ALMOST EVERY ONE OF MY PROPERTY
IS ONE OF ONLY ONE OF WHICH IS
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND
OTHERS COME IN AND DO ANNUAL
PHYSICAL INSPECTIONS AS WELL.
>> SOME OF THE OPERATING
CHALLENGES ARE INSURANCE WE ARE
SEEING JUST ON ONE OF OUR
PROPERTIES, MILLER MANOR DUE TO
THE FIRE WE HAD A COUPLE
OF YEARS AGO OUR INSURANCE WENT
FROM FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR TO OVER TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS A YEAR IN ONE
YEAR.
BUT OUR OTHER INSURANCE ON OUR
OTHER PROPERTIES ARE ALSO
ESCALATING JUST LIKE EVERYWHERE
IN THE UNITED STATES THIS IS
NOT UNIQUE TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UTILITY COSTS ARE VERY
UNPREDICTABLE.
THE TOXICITY AND PREVALENCE
OF STREET DRUGS IS VERY
IMPACTFUL ON OUR RESIDENTS.
THE LACK OF UNIVERSAL HEALTH
CARE VERY IMPACTFUL ON OUR
RESIDENTS AS WELL.
AND I MENTIONED THE REGULATORY
ENVIRONMENT.
>> SO WHAT I MY GOAL BEFORE I
RETIRE IS TO COME UP WITH A
BETTER DEVELOPMENT MODEL.
WHAT WOULD THAT LOOK LIKE
TRYING TO LOOK AT THE
REGULATORY BURDENS AT THE CITY.
THAT'S SOMETHING I KNOW OTHERS
IN THE CITY ARE ALSO INTERESTED
IN WORKING ON REDUCING THAT 12
LAYER CAPITAL STACK TO MORE
LIKE TWO TO THREE FUNDING
SOURCES, CONTINUED DEVELOPMENT
OF CITY OWN PROPERTIES AND AS
YOU'RE AWARE, WE ARE LOOKING AT
HOW WE COULD DO BOND FINANCING
WITH THE MILLAGE BACKING THE
BONDS SO THAT WE CAN HAVE MORE
CASH AVAILABLE AT THE FRONT END
AND PAY IT BACK OVER TIME WITH
THE MILLAGE AND I DON'T HAVE AN
ANSWER YET ON HOW THAT'S BEST
GOING TO WORK BUT THAT WILL BE
COMING IN DECEMBER TO CITY
COUNCIL.
SOME OF THE COMMON QUESTIONS
THAT I RECEIVE ARE WHY ARE YOU
DOING NEW CONSTRUCTION?
WHY DON'T YOU DO ACQUISITION?
ISN'T THAT CHEAPER?
WELL, IT DEPENDS.
DOES IT HAVE AN ELEVATOR?
ARE THERE ACCESSIBLE UNITS?
>> DO THEY HAVE GUESTS?
DO THEY HAVE BASED PAINT?
ALL KINDS OF QUESTIONS COME
INTO LOOKING AT A PROPERTY NOT
JUST DO I HAVE THE MONEY TO
ACTUALLY ACQUIRE OTHER
QUESTIONS I GET DOWN OR IS IT A
GOOD QUESTION I GET ASKED IS
ISN'T IT MORE EXPENSIVE IN THE
DOWNTOWN VERSUS OUTSIDE THE
DOWNTOWN DEPENDS EVERYTHING IS
PROPERTY SPECIFIC.
EVERYTHING IS DEPENDENT ON WHAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO BUILD.
HOW DENSE IT IS, HOW TALL IT IS
AND THE DOWNTOWN CAN BE MORE
EXPENSIVE IF YOU'RE BUILDING
THE EXACT SAME BUILDING OUTSIDE
THE DOWNTOWN.
BUT THAT'S TYPICALLY NOT THE
CASE.
SO IT DEPENDS AND THAT IS WHERE
ALSO WHERE MOST OF THE CITY'S
PROPERTIES ARE THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT DEVELOPING AND SO
IT'S AVAILABLE AND THAT MAKES
IT LESS EXPENSIVE FOR US.
I ALSO GET QUESTIONS ABOUT
INCLUDING AFFORDABLE UNITS IN
MARKET RATE PROPERTIES THAT ARE
ASKING FOR ADDITIONAL DENSITY
AND THEY TRIGGER THE AFFORDABLE
UNIT OR CASH CONTRIBUTION IN
LIEU OF UNITS.
MY POSITION HAS ALWAYS OR I
SHOULDN'T SAY IT'S ALWAYS BEEN
IT'S IT'S EVOLVED OVER TIME BUT
MOST RECENTLY IT IS THE
CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF UNITS
IS MORE BENEFICIAL IF YOU ARE
LOOKING AT MAKING SURE THAT THE
UNITS THAT ARE INCLUDED ARE
ACTUALLY FOR LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS.
UNFORTUNATELY MOST OF OUR
PROPERTIES WERE THAT'S BEEN
TRIGGERED IN THE CITY HAVE BEEN
IN AND AROUND THE DOWNTOWN OR
ON CAMPUS AND SO WHAT HAPPENS
IS WE END UP HAVING STUDENTS
THAT ARE IN THOSE UNITS BECAUSE
THEY TEND TO BE ONE BEDROOMS AS
WELL AND IF THERE WAS A WAY TO
GUARANTEE THAT THOSE WERE LOW
INCOME HOUSEHOLDS, STUDENTS
THAT COME FROM A LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLD BUT WE CAN'T WE
HAVEN'T FAILED TO FIGURE THAT
OUT THEN AT LEAST WE KNOW
THERE'S LOW INCOME STUDENTS
BEING ASSISTED.
BUT BECAUSE I WAS TELLING YOU
MOST STUDENTS ARE LOW INCOME SO
YOU DON'T KNOW THAT THEY
ACTUALLY HAVE A NEED FOR THOSE
REDUCED COST UNITS.
IT'S ALSO HARD FOR MARKET RATE
APARTMENT OWNERS TO THEY DON'T
SCREEN PEOPLE IN THEY SCREEN
PEOPLE OUT AND SO WE REALLY
WANT TO MEET THE LOW INCOME
NEEDS OF OUR COMMUNITY.
WE REALLY NEED FOLKS THAT DO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WHICH IS NOT
ONLY NONPROFITS.
THERE'S ACTUALLY MORE FOR
PROFITS TO DO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THAN NONPROFITS.
SAD TO SAY BUT THAT IS TRUE.
THE OTHER QUESTION I OFTEN GET
IS WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A DEVELOPMENT SUBSIDY
AND A RENT OR AN OPERATING
SUBSIDY WHEN YOU HAVE A
DEVELOPMENT SUBSIDY?
WHEN I WAS TALKING IN THE
BEGINNING ABOUT THE DEVELOPMENT
COSTS WHEN I GET GRANT FUNDING
FROM OTHER SOURCES THEY AREN'T
GUARANTEEING MY RENT IS
SUBSIDIZED AS FAR AS PEOPLE
PAYING 30 PERCENT OF THEIR
INCOME ON RENT.
THE ONLY WAY YOU CAN GUARANTEE
THAT IS IF YOU HAVE A RENT
SUBSIDY ON TOP OF YOUR
DEVELOPMENT SUBSIDY.
SO IF YOU HAVE UNITS IN THE
MARKETPLACE THROUGH OUR ZONING
FOR EXAMPLE JUST BECAUSE THE
RENT IS LESS THAN MARKET RATE
LET'S SAY IT'S TWELVE HUNDRED
DOLLARS IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT
SOMEBODY LIVING THERE IS PAYING
30 PERCENT OF THEIR INCOME ON
RENT.
THEY COULD BE PAYING 50 PERCENT
OF THEIR INCOME ON RENT.
>> IF YOU DON'T HAVE A RENT
SUBSIDY THEN YOU CAN'T
GUARANTEE IT.
>> AND THIS IS MY LAST SLIDE.
I JUST WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
WE HAVE A LOT OF PARTNERS IN
THE COMMUNITY THAT WE EITHER
HAVE CONTRACTS WITH OR WE HAVE
AND USE WITH THE HELP US
PROVIDE THE WIDE RANGE
OF SERVICES TO OUR RESIDENTS AS
WELL AS OUR VOUCHER TENANTS.
AND I PROBABLY NEED TO UPDATE
THIS NOW THAT I'M THINKING
ABOUT IT.
>> I WILL TURN THIS OVER TO
AMANDA CARLO
, GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU ALL.
YOU COULD START THE MESS HALL.
DO YOU WANT TO TAKE QUESTIONS
NOW OR DO YOU WANT FOR YOUR
PORTION OR DO YOU WANT TO WAIT
UNTIL OK, WELL WE HAVE A LOT
OF TIME FOR QUESTIONS BUILT
INTO THE PRESENTATION SO YOU
ALL KNOW.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M AMANDA CARLISLE, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
RUSSIA HOUSING ALLIANCE.
GOOD TO SEE MANY OF YOU FOR
THOSE THAT DON'T KNOW, THE
HOUSING ALLIANCE IS A COALITION
OF ABOUT TWENTY FIVE NONPROFIT
AND GOVERNMENT PARTNERS THAT
ARE PROVIDING SERVICES AND
HOUSING TO PEOPLE WHO ARE
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS OR
WHO ARE EXPERIENCED IN HOUSING
AND SECURITY IN WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND WE DO KIND
OF HOMELESS SYSTEMS PLANNING
AND COORDINATION KIND
OF SERVING AS THAT BACKBONE
ORGANIZATION.
WE PROVIDE TRAINING AND
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO OUR
MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS AS WELL AS
OTHERS.
WE DO LANDLORD ENGAGEMENT AND
SUPPORT RECOGNIZED NEED BY OUR
MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS MANY YEARS
AGO TO GET LANDLORDS ENGAGED IN
THE WORK TO END HOMELESSNESS
AND ALSO ADVOCACY AND PUBLIC
EDUCATION WORK AND A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT US.
WE FUNDRAISED THE EIGHT MILLION
TO BUILD THE DELANA CENTER
DOWNTOWN IN 2003 WE ADVOCATED
FOR INTERFAITH HOSPITALITY
NETWORK TO FIND A PERMANENT
HOME AT ST. JOE'S OR TRINITY
ALPHA HOUSE.
WE CREATED THE BLUEPRINT AND
HOMELESSNESS AND PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR CITY
OF IPSI AND WASHTENAW COUNTY
AND ALSO WORKED ON THE CITY'S
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ON THE
SCREEN HERE OUR SOME OF OUR
MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS.
SO YOU'LL SEE A BROAD RANGE
OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE
MEMBERS OF OUR COALITION
INCLUDING EVERYTHING FROM
STREET OUTREACH PROVIDERS,
EMERGENCY SHELTER PROVIDERS,
RAPID REHOUSING, PERMANENT
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING AND AGENCIES
THAT MAYBE DON'T DO HOMELESS OR
HOUSING SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES BUT
THEY SERVE THE POPULATION
OF PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS OR HOUSING
INSECURITY REALIZING THIS IS A
LITTLE SMALL SO SORRY APOLOGIES
FOR THIS.
I JUST WANTED TO PROVIDE A
LITTLE BIT OF HISTORY ABOUT THE
COMMUNITY'S BLUEPRINT TO END
HOMELESSNESS.
SO IN 2009 THE COUNTY BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS CREATED A
RESOLUTION TO LOOK AT THREE
KIND OF PHASED APPROACHES TO
ADDRESSING HOMELESSNESS.
THE DELINA CENTER WAS ONE THE
MOVEMENT TO INTERFAITH
HOSPITALITY NETWORK TO ALPHA
HOUSE WAS THE SECOND AND THEN
THE CREATION OF THE BLUEPRINT
AND HOMELESSNESS IN 2004 OR WAS
THE THIRD KIND OF PIECE OF THE
PUZZLE IN 2006 THERE WAS A TASK
FORCE THAT WORKED FROM THE
BLUEPRINT ACKNOWLEDGING THAT WE
NEEDED TO CREATE 500 UNITS
OF PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
SO AFFORDABLE HOUSING COUPLED
WITH PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
SERVICES AND THEN IN 2011 THE
SORRY C O IN BETWEEN 2006 AND
2011 THERE WAS A TASK FORCE
THAT WAS CREATED TO UNDERSTAND
NOT ONLY HOW TO BUILD THE UNITS
BUT HOW TO PROVIDE SUSTAINABLE
REVENUE SOURCE FOR THE SERVICES
AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
SYSTEM.
EVANGELIZED FUND ENDOWMENT WAS
CREATED OUT OF THAT TASK FORCE
WORK AT THE COUNTY LEVEL THAT
WAS ESTABLISHED BY TRINITY
HEALTH, ANN ARBOR OR ST. JOE'S
AT THE TIME IN 2011 AS A
COMMEMORATION FOR THEIR 100
YEAR ANNIVERSARY IN THE
COMMUNITY AND THEN IT WAS
MATCHED BY THE ENTIRE AREA
COMMUNITY FOUNDATION AND THAT
ENDOWMENT NOW HAS ABOUT EIGHT
MILLION DOLLARS IN IT.
THE DISTRIBUTION OUT OF THAT
FUND THIS YEAR WILL BE ABOUT
200000 DOLLARS THAT WILL GO FOR
SUPPORTIVE SERVICES IN
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
AND THEN IN 2011 WE CREATED AN
UPDATE TO THE BLUEPRINT.
WE DID SOME FOCUS GROUPS AND
PROVIDED SOME RECOMMENDATIONS
ON HOW TO ADDRESS WHAT WAS
ORIGINALLY IN THE BLUEPRINT.
I WILL SAY EVEN TODAY WITH
BEING 20 YEARS OLD, THE
BLUEPRINT HAS AN AMAZING WEALTH
OF INFORMATION IN IT AND A LOT
OF RESEARCH BACKED UP FOR MANY
YEARS IN KIND OF HOW TO SOLVE
THE WORK OR SOLVE THE ISSUE
OF HOMELESSNESS.
AND I THINK THE TREND THAT I
HAVE SEEN OVER TIME IS THAT
THERE ARE THESE SORT OF LIKE
INVESTMENTS THAT ARE MADE AND
THEN THEY'RE TAKEN AWAY.
AND SO I'LL GIVE AN EXAMPLE
OF ONE THAT'S NOT AN INVESTMENT
THAT YOU ALL PROBABLY MADE BUT
MICHIGAN MICHIGAN PRISONER
REENTRY PROGRAM WAS CREATED AND
HAD NATIONAL SUCCESS AND NOW
WHAT YOU SEE IS THAT FOR OUR
COUNTY WHAT WE USED TO GET IN
FUNDING THAT'S NOW DISPERSED AS
PART OF WHAT'S CALLED A
FENDERSON SAYS TO NINE COUNTIES
IN THE STATE OF MICHIGAN IN OUR
KIND OF LIKE LOCAL
JURISDICTIONS.
>> SO THERE WAS INVESTMENT, IT
WORKED BUT THEN THE FUNDING,
YOU KNOW, DEPENDING ON A
DIFFERENT ADMINISTRATION AT THE
STATE OR WHATNOT, THE FUNDING
WAS KIND OF PULLED AWAY AND SO
A LOT OF THE WORK THAT IS IN
THE BLUEPRINT AND HOMELESSNESS
I THINK IS STILL RELEVANT.
>> IT'S JUST A MATTER
OF RESOURCING IT THE RIGHT WAY
.
AND THEN LASTLY, I DID WANT TO
POINT TO IN 2015 OUR COUNTY
JOINED THE FOUR ZERO
INITIATIVE.
SO IT'S A NATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE
SPECIFICALLY TO END VETERAN AND
CHRONIC HOMELESSNESS AND IT'S
LED BY THE NATIONAL NONPROFIT
COMMUNITY SOLUTIONS AND THEY'VE
BEEN REALLY HELPING US TO
TARGET OUR WORK AROUND HOW WE
IDENTIFY PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS, ASSESS THEM.
WE HAVE A CREATED A BY NAME
LIST OF ALL OF THE FOLKS
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS IN
OUR COMMUNITY THAT WE UPDATE
VERY REGULARLY IN REAL TIME AND
THEN WE HAVE A PROCESS WHEREBY
WE MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
HOMELESS HOUSING PROGRAMS.
YOU KNOW WHO IS MOST ACUTE AND
MOST IN NEED OF THOSE RESOURCES
SO BUILDING ON THAT WORK WE'RE
CONTINUING TO DO AND I'LL KIND
OF END THE PRESENTATION WITH A
LITTLE BIT OF A NOD BACK TO
THAT SLIDE.
I DID WANT TO ADDRESS THE
DEFINITIONS THAT WE USE AROUND
HOMELESSNESS BECAUSE I THINK
SOMETIMES THAT GETS CONFUSING.
SO CATEGORY ONE IS WHAT'S KNOWN
AS LITERALLY HOMELESS.
SO IT'S SOMEONE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS ON THE STREETS OR
IN EMERGENCY SHELTERS.
CATEGORY TWO IS WHAT WE CALL
KIND OF FOLKS THAT MAYBE ARE
LOSING THEIR PRIMARY NIGHTTIME
RESIDENCE WITHIN 14 DAYS.
SO THEY MIGHT BENEFIT FROM
EVICTION PREVENTION ASSISTANCE
FOR EXAMPLE, CATEGORY THREE IS
HUD DOES NOT ALLOW US TO USE AT
THIS MOMENT AND MOST
COMMUNITIES ARE NOT ALLOWED TO
USE CATEGORY THREE.
BUT IT'S OTHER YOUTH OR
FAMILIES NOT IN CATEGORIES ONE
OR TWO WHO DON'T HAVE A REGULAR
PERMANENT HOUSING OPTION IN THE
LAST 60 DAYS TYPICALLY WHAT I
WOULD REFERENCE WOULD BE THESE
ARE FOLKS THAT MAYBE ARE
DOUBLED UP OR COUCH SURFING
DON'T HAVE THAT KIND OF REGULAR
NIGHTTIME RESIDENCE BUT DON'T
NECESSARILY WON'T BE LOSING
THEIR HOUSING WITHIN 14 DAYS,
MIGHT NOT EVEN HAVE A LEASE BUT
ARE KIND OF JUST WITH FAMILY OR
FRIENDS OR OTHER FOLKS AND THEN
CATEGORY FOUR IS SURVIVORS
FLEEING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE WHO
ALSO CANNOT OBTAIN PERMANENT
HOUSING.
>> ONE THING I WANTED TO STRESS
IS THAT THIS IS THE DEFINITION
USED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HUD AND ALSO OUR STATE
GOVERNMENT SPECIFICALLY
MICHIGAN STATE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
MR. BUT IF YOU ARE TO INVEST
LOCAL DOLLARS THERE IS MORE
FLEXIBILITY SO WE COULD MAYBE
FOR EXAMPLE AND CATEGORY TWO
LOOK TO 21 DAYS BEFORE SOMEONE
IS GOING TO LOSE THEIR
NIGHTTIME RESIDENCE.
JENNIFER WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THAT I INCLUDED THAT.
BUT JUST SO YOU ALL KNOW THAT
WE'RE MOST OF THE FUNDS THAT WE
HAVE TO ADMINISTER IN THE HOME
SYSTEM OF CARE ARE VERY
SPECIFIC TO CATEGORIES.
ONE MOSTLY AND THEN CATEGORY
TWO AND FOUR NOT THREE.
>> SO THIS SLIDE JUST SHOWS YOU
KIND OF A CONTINUUM OF THE
BEDS, THE EMERGENCY SHELTER
BEDS AS WELL AS THE PERMANENT
HOUSING UNITS THAT WE HAVE IN
OUR COMMUNITY AND THE AGENCIES
THAT PROVIDE THOSE BEDS OR
UNITS.
>> SO WHAT I WANT TO POINT OUT
HERE IS THAT YOU'LL SEE ON THE
RIGHT HAND SIDE WE HAVE A KEY
THAT SHOWS WHAT POPULATION OR
SUB POPULATION IS BEING SERVED
BY THESE DIFFERENT AGENCIES AND
THEY'RE ALSO OUTLINED IF IT'S
AN AGENCY THAT'S SERVING MAYBE
TO OF THOSE POPULATIONS MOST
OF OUR PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING IS DEDICATED TO PEOPLE
EXPERIENCING CHRONIC
HOMELESSNESS AND THAT'S A VERY
SPECIFIC DEFINITION AND ALSO A
MANDATE THAT HUD HAS REQUIRED
OF COMMUNITIES TO LOOK AT THOSE
WHO HAVE THE LONGEST HISTORIES
OF HOMELESSNESS COUPLED WITH A
DISABLING CONDITION MAYBE ITS
PHYSICAL HEALTH, MENTAL
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER.
BUT MOST OF OUR PERMANENT
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING IS DEDICATED
TO THAT POPULATION AND THEN
YOU'LL SEE ON KIND OF OUR
EMERGENCY SHELTER SIDE WE'VE
TAKEN GREAT CARE IN THE SYSTEM
OF CARE TO HAVE AGENCIES THAT
HAVE SPECIALTIES AND SERVICES
THAT ARE SPECIFIC TO A CERTAIN
POPULATION AND THEY ARE THE
ONES THAT ARE PROVIDING THAT
EMERGENCY SHELTER MAYBE THE
TEMPORARY HOUSING BE RAPID
REHOUSING.
SO EXAMPLES WOULD BE OZONE
HOUSE REALLY MEETING THE NEEDS
OF INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE YOUNG
PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS AND HOUSING
INSECURITY.
SO YOU'LL SEE KIND OF IN PURPLE
THEY'RE PROVIDING DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF SERVICE.
>> THIS SLIDE SHOWS YOU THE
HOMELESS POPULATION AT A POINT
IN TIME.
THAT'S THE BLUE BAR THAT YOU'RE
SEEING AND OUR POINT IN TIME
HOW IT IS CONDUCTED EACH
JANUARY DURING THE LAST 10 DAYS
OF JANUARY.
>> THE IDEA IS THAT THIS HUD
MANDATED BUT THE IDEA IS THAT
IN COLDER CLIMATES LIKE
MICHIGAN THAT WE WILL MOSTLY
FIND PEOPLE INDOORS AND WILL BE
ABLE TO GET A BETTER ACCOUNT
OF PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS.
>> WE DO HAVE TEAMS THAT GO
OUT.
I KNOW SOME OF YOU HAVE
PARTICIPATED OVER TIME DURING
THE POINT IN TIME COUNT TO FIND
FOLKS ON THE STREETS, OFFER
THEM SHELTER, OFFER THEM OTHER
RESOURCES THAT THEY NEED AND SO
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN AGAIN IN
JANUARY OR 2024.
>> BUT WHAT YOU'LL SEE IS THAT
WE HAD KIND OF THE MOST NUMBER
OF PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS AT A POINT IN TIME
IN 2014 AND THEN A STEEP
DECLINE IN 2015 AND WE HAVE
CONTINUED TO SEE A DECLINE FOR
YEARS SINCE THEN.
ALSO WHAT YOU SEE IN THE RED
ARE THE TOTAL SOME OF THE
EMERGENCY SHELTER BEDS ARE IN
THE COMMUNITY AND TEMPORARY
BEDS AND THEN YOU'LL SEE HOW
THEY'RE BROKEN OUT WITH FAMILY
BEDS AND FAMILY ONLY BEDS.
ONE THING I DID WANT TO ADDRESS
IS THAT IN 2015 WELL IN 2013
OUR COMMUNITY MADE A COMMITMENT
WITH OUR HUD CONTINUUM OF CARE
DOLLARS WHICH NOW IS ABOUT
SEVEN MILLION DOLLARS THAT
COMES INTO THE COMMUNITY FOR
HOMELESS ASSISTANCE THROUGH HUD
IN 2013 WE MADE A COMMITMENT TO
REALLY FOCUS ON PERMANENT
HOUSING WITH THOSE RESOURCES.
SO WE REALLOCATED CLOSED DOWN
SOME PROGRAMS THAT MAY BE
PROVIDED DIFFERENT TYPES
OF SERVICES THAT WEREN'T AS
EFFECTIVE AS PERMANENT HOUSING
AND WE REINVESTED THOSE.
AND SO YOU'LL SEE IN 2015 WAS
SORT OF THE OPENING OF SOME
OF THOSE NEW PROGRAMS AND ONE
EXAMPLE OF A PROGRAM THAT YOU
ALL ARE FAMILIAR WITH IS THE
CREATION OF MILLER MANOR'S
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
PROGRAM WAS DONE WITH THAT
REALLOCATION OF FUNDING.
WE REALLOCATED ABOUT 60 PERCENT
OF OUR TOTAL HUD FUNDS THAT
YEAR.
>> SO WHEN SOMEONE IS
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS IN
THE COMMUNITY AND THE ENTIRE
COUNTY, THE WE HAVE A PROCESS
THAT'S CALLED COORDINATED ENTRY
WHERE FOLKS CAN CALL ONE SINGLE
NUMBER THAT'S HALK SEVEN THREE
FOUR NINE SIX ONE 1999.
THEY CAN CALL HACC THE BE
SCHEDULED FOR AN ASSESSMENT IF
THEY ARE DETERMINED TO BE AT
IMMINENT RISK OF HOMELESSNESS
OR EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS
AND THEN THEY KIND OF GET
ASSESSED ASSESSED AND THEN
PLACED ON DIFFERENT LISTS
WAITING FOR HOUSING OR SHELTER
IN NON WINTER MONTHS.
SO WE KIND OF HAVE THIS LIKE
TRIAGE APPROACH APPROACH AT THE
CALL CENTER AND I DID WANT TO
SHARE YOU ALL PROBABLY KNOW HOW
TO TRANSITION ITS LEAD AGENCY
INTO OCTOBER OF TWENTY TWENTY
TWO.
SO WE ARE NOW BASICALLY ONE
YEAR INTO THE NEW PROGRAM SO
THE COUNTY'S DEPARTMENT OFFICE
OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CAN DOES THE CALL
CENTER FUNCTION S.O.S COMMUNITY
SERVICES PROVIDES PREVENTION
EVICTION PREVENTION ASSESSMENTS
AS WELL AS FAMILY SHELTER
ASSESSMENTS AND THEN THE
SHELTER ASSOCIATION
OF WASHTENAW COUNTY PROVIDES
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS.
THOSE ARE AGAIN TO HAVE THE
AGENCIES THAT ARE SPECIALIZING
IN DIFFERENT SERVICES BEING
ABLE TO PROVIDE SOME OF THOSE
ASSESSMENTS.
>> I THINK YOU KNOW THAT
TYPICALLY WE HAVE WAIT TIMES
FOR EMERGENCY SHELTER IN NOT
WINTER MONTHS AND WHAT FOLKS
ARE GETTING KIND OF IN THE IN
THE MEANTIME IS TYPICALLY AN
ASSESSMENT HOPEFULLY IF THEY
ARE EXPERIENCING STREET
HOMELESSNESS OR GETTING HOOKED
UP WITH OUR PATH TEAM THROUGH
THE COUNTY THAT'S PROVIDING
STREET OUTREACH SERVICES THEY
CAN, YOU KNOW, GET
NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICES AT
TALANA CENTER, YOU KNOW, OTHER
TYPES OF SERVICES WHILE THEY
ARE WAITING FOR SHELTER AND
MAYBE EVEN SELECTED INTO
HOUSING
STRAIGHT FROM THE
STREETS.
>> SO BETWEEN THIS SLIDE
ACTUALLY SHOWS JULY 20, 22 TO
JULY 20, 23.
AND WHAT I WANTED TO STRESS
HERE WAS THE INCREASE IN FAMILY
HOMELESSNESS STARTING KIND
OF NOVEMBER DECEMBER TIME FRAME
AND THEN REALLY SKYROCKETING IN
FEBRUARY OF LAST OF THIS PAST
YEAR AND A NUMBER OF FACTORS
WENT INTO I THINK THE DRAMATIC
RISE IN THE INCREASE AND ONE
OF THEM WAS THE TRANSITION HAWK
WE DIDN'T HAVE ON DAY ONE
OF THE TRANSITION.
WE DIDN'T HAVE THE PROCESSES IN
PLACE TO MAKE SURE THAT FAMILY
ASSESSMENTS WERE AS SMOOTH AS
POSSIBLE AND JANUARY OR SO
DECEMBER, JANUARY WE HAD FIVE
TO SIX WEEK WAITING LIST FOR
FAMILY EMERGENCY SHELTER
ASSESSMENTS UNACCEPTABLE.
BUT NOW THE TIME IS 48 HOURS
WERE IN OUR COMMUNITY STANDARD
FOR 48 HOURS FROM THE TIME THAT
SOMEONE CALLS THE CALL CENTER
THE TIME THAT THEY GET A FAMILY
SHELTER ASSESSMENT.
BUT IN THE ABSENCE OF HAVING
KIND OF THAT REAL TIME OR CLOSE
TO REAL TIME ASSESSMENTS, THE
COUNTY RESPONDED BY PUTTING UP
AN EMERGENCY HOTELING PROGRAM
AND SO WE SAW A BIG NUMBER
OF FAMILIES AND INDIVIDUALS
WITHIN FAMILIES ACCESSING THAT
FAMILY HOTELING PROGRAM IN
FEBRUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY
THREE.
>> I THINK AS OF NOW WE HAVE
JUST ABOUT 20 OR LESS FAMILIES
STILL IN THAT HOTELING PROGRAM
AND THEY ARE RAMPING DOWN AND
GETTING I THINK I JUST HEARD
ABOUT 12 OF THOSE HOUSEHOLDS
ARE PULLED FOR HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHERS SO HOPEFULLY WE'LL GET
HOUSED REALLY SOON THE AVERAGE
LENGTH OF TIME TO HOUSING ALSO
REALLY JUMPED THIS YEAR TO 160
DAYS UP FROM OUR AVERAGE IN
TWENTY TWENTY TWO AT 109 DAYS.
OUR GOAL IS LESS THAN 90 DAYS
FROM THE DATE OF ID TO THE DATE
THAT SOMEONE IS REHOUSED.
I DID WANT TO ADDRESS AS A
RESULT OF THOSE KIND
OF SKYROCKETING NUMBERS
OF FAMILIES THE CONTINUUM
OF CARE BOARD IN APRIL
CREATED A WINTER SHELTER TASK
FORCE WE'VE BEEN MEETING FROM
MAY UP UNTIL NOW AND WE HAVE A
MEETING LATER THIS WEEK TO
PREPARE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
WINTER SHELTERING DURING THIS
UPCOMING WINTER SEASON.
IT'S ALREADY STARTING TO GET
COLD OUT AND WE NEED TO BE ABLE
TO HAVE OPTIONS FOR FOLKS TO GO
THAT WILL BE SAFE IN MICHIGAN'S
CLIMATE AND SO THE SHELTER
ASSOCIATION OF WASHINGTON
COUNTY HAS REALLY ALWAYS TAKEN
ON THIS EFFORT WITH PARTNERS.
BUT YOU KNOW, REALLY THEY'VE
LED THE EFFORT FOR INDIVIDUALS,
SINGLE ADULTS EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS.
THEY HAVE A ROBUST PLAN IN
PLACE THIS YEAR THAT DAN CAN
TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE LATER IF
YOU HAVE QUESTIONS.
BUT AT THE KIND OF THE HEIGHT
OF THE NEED LAST YEAR LAST
WINTER ON ANY GIVEN NIGHT THERE
WAS A DEMAND FOR ABOUT ONE
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FOUR WAS
THE MAXIMUM NUMBER
OF INDIVIDUALS THAT THE SHELTER
HAD BEEN SERVING.
THEY'RE PLANNING THIS YEAR TO
HAVE MAXIMUM CAPACITY BETWEEN
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY NINE TO
TWO HUNDRED AND FOUR PEOPLE PER
NIGHT.
SO TRYING TO ANTICIPATE A RISE
IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT
WILL BE NEEDING TO ACCESS
EMERGENCY SHELTER ON ANY GIVEN
NIGHT ON THE FAMILY SIDE WE
HAVE HAD LESS NEED OVER TIME
FOR FAMILY EXPANSION OF SHELTER
OPTIONS FOR FAMILIES IN THE
WINTER MONTHS WE TYPICALLY DO
NOT FIND FAMILIES EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS ON THE STREETS OR
ON THE STREETS DURING OUR POINT
IN TIME COUNT.
BUT LAST YEAR WAS KIND OF THE
FIRST YEAR THAT WE SAW THIS
REAL SPIKE SO WE'VE BEEN HAVING
A LOT OF CONVERSATION ABOUT
WHAT IT WILL TAKE TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE CAN SAY YES TO ANY
FAMILY THAT NEEDS EMERGENCY
SHELTER DURING THE WINTER
MONTHS THE TASK FORCE IS
PREPARING THE RECOMMENDATIONS.
WE'RE WORKING TO GET THOSE OUT
.
YOU ALL WILL GET A COPY OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS WHEN THEY DO
COME OUT.
BUT PREVIEW OF THEM IF YOU
WOULD LIKE IS THAT WE DON'T
HAVE ANY EVICTION PREVENTION
RESOURCES IN THE COMMUNITY.
>> AGAIN, AND SO WE ARE LOOKING
FOR AN INVESTMENT IN KIND
OF UPSTREAM EVICTION PREVENTION
RESOURCES TO MAKE SURE THAT
FAMILIES THAT CAN WE CAN
PREVENT THEIR EVICTION THAT WE
CAN DO THAT.
WE ALSO THE COUNTY LAST YEAR
CREATED WHAT'S CALLED A SHELTER
DIVERSION PILOT WHERE THEY
PROVIDED STIPENDS TO FAMILIES
TO HAVE THEM NOT ACCESS THE
HOTELING PROGRAM.
THEY PROVIDED FOUR HUNDRED
DOLLARS TWICE.
SO ON AVERAGE A FAMILY WOULD
GET EIGHT HUNDRED DOLLARS AND
THEY HAD GREAT SUCCESS WITH THE
HOUSEHOLDS THAT THEY SERVED.
ABOUT FIFTY EIGHT PERCENT NEVER
CAME BACK TO THE HOMELESS
SYSTEM OF CARE AS OF WHEN WE
TRACKED THAT DATA AT THE END
OF SEPTEMBER.
SO WE ARE HOPING THAT WE CAN DO
A SHELTER DIVERSION PROGRAM
AGAIN WHERE WE CAN PROVIDE
STIPENDS TO FAMILIES AND THEN
S.O.S COMMUNITY SERVICES ALSO
RECENTLY GOT A STATE GRANT TO
PROVIDE SHELTER DIVERSION
RESOURCES AS WELL.
SO WE'RE GOING TO TRY TO PAIR
THAT TOGETHER.
DIVERSION CAN BE ANYTHING FROM
YOU NEED A TICKET ON A BUS OR A
TRAIN TO GET TO A FAMILY OR
FRIEND IN ANOTHER COMMUNITY.
>> YOU NEED TO GO WE'RE GOING
TO TRY TO HELP YOU GET BACK TO
A FAMILY IN THIS COMMUNITY BUT
YOU MIGHT NEED TO HELP PAYING
FOR GROCERIES SO THAT THEY'LL
LET YOU STAY HERE.
YOU CAN USE THOSE FUNDS KIND
OF ANY WAY THAT MAKES SENSE FOR
THE COMMUNITY FOR THE HOUSEHOLD
TO BE ABLE TO PROVIDE OR
OBTAIN, YOU KNOW, HOUSING IT
MIGHT NOT BE PERMANENT.
I THINK THAT'S ONE THING THAT
FOLKS KIND OF STRUGGLE WITH IS
IT MIGHT NOT BE A PERMANENT
SOLUTION BUT KEEPING THEM OUT
OF SHELTER WHILE WE CAN HELP
THEM WORK ON OTHER ISSUES IS
PROBABLY THE BEST FOR THEM AND
SO WE'RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
WAYS THAT WE CAN PROVIDE SOME
LEVEL OF RESOURCE SO THAT MAYBE
THEY CAN STAY WITH FAMILY OR
FRIENDS WHILE WE'RE WORKING ON
A MORE PERMANENT SOLUTION WITH
THEM.
THE LAST THING IS THAT WE ARE
LOOKING AT POTENTIALLY A
ROTATING SHELTER FOR FAMILIES
OR IDEALLY WE WOULD LOVE TO
HAVE A PLACE BETWEEN JANUARY
AND THE END OF MARCH THAT WE
CAN PROVIDE OVERFLOW EMERGENCY
SHELTER AND SO WE ARE IN
DISCUSSIONS.
>> BUT IF YOU KNOW OF ANYONE
ANY PLACE THAT IS INTERESTED,
WE HAVE AN AGENCY AND SOME
STAFFING SUPPORT THAT IS
WILLING TO DO THE WORK AND BE
ABLE TO EXPAND THE SHELTER FOR
FAMILIES.
BUT WE DON'T YET HAVE A SITE
AND WE'RE LOOKING TO BETWEEN 25
AND 30 FAMILIES AT A TIME THAT
THIS SITE COULD ACCOMMODATE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE LAST PART OF THE
PRESENTATION IS THAT I WANTED
TO SHARE OUR GAPS AND NEEDS
ANALYSIS WITH YOU ALL THAT IS
CONDUCTED BY THE CORPORATION
FOR SUPPORTIVE HOUSING.
THIS IS IT WAS MODELS AND
ANALYZES OUR EMERGENCY SHELTER
RAPIDLY HOUSING AND PERMANENT
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING RESOURCES IN
THE COMMUNITY.
AND SO THE RESOURCES THAT WERE
CONSIDERED ALSO INCLUDED
DIVERSION AND PREVENTION, THE
TEMPORARY INTERVENTIONS LIKE
SHELTER, RAPID REHOUSING AND
THEN PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING.
>> THIS CHART IS A LITTLE BIT
WONKY BUT IT BASICALLY SHOWS
WHAT OUR RESOURCE GAP IS FOR
PERMANENT HOUSING BASED ON WHAT
WE HAVE IN THE SYSTEM, THE
EXISTING RESOURCES AND WHAT
EACH DETERMINED AS OUR
ANNUALIZED NEED TO SAVE YOU
FROM THIS CHART I'LL SHOW YOU
THIS IS THE SUMMARY THAT WE
NEED ABOUT 800 EIGHTY SIX LOTS
OF RAPID REHOUSING WHICH IS I
GUESS I DIDN'T EXPLAIN RAPID
REHOUSING IS A SHORT TO MEDIUM
TERM INTERVENTION WHERE WE
PROVIDE SOME LEVEL OF RENTAL
ASSISTANCE AND SERVICES THAT
ARE COUPLED AND IT CAN BE
ANYWHERE FROM SIX MONTHS TO YOU
KNOW, 12 SOMETIMES 18 MONTHS
OF ASSISTANCE, EVEN 24
DEPENDING ON THE FUNDING SOURCE
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
NEEDS WERE IDENTIFIED AS WE
NEEDED EIGHT HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY ONE UNITS OF PERMANENT
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING.
AS YOU KNOW, THIS IS A LONG
TERM HOUSING RESOURCE COUPLED
WITH SUPPORTIVE SERVICES FOR
OUR MOST IN NEED FOLKS, MOST
VULNERABLE FOLKS AND THEN WE
NEEDED TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
FOUR SLOTS OF DIVERSION OR
PREVENTION WHICH WAS WHAT I WAS
JUST SHARING A LITTLE BIT
BEFORE THAT SORT OF COUPLES
MEDIATION WITH FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE IN TERMS OF OUR
TEMPORARY HOUSING NEEDS WE
SIMILARLY HAVE A GAP.
THIS IS OUR BASE POPULATION AND
THE FOLKS THAT WERE NEEDING
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE THE
RESOURCE GAP YOU'LL SEE PRETTY
MUCH IN PARENTHESES THAT'S
SHOWING A DEFICIT AND THEN THE
TAKEAWAY IS THAT WE NEED ABOUT
FIFTY EIGHT EMERGENCY SHELTER
OR TEMPORARY HOUSING
INTERVENTIONS THAT ARE NEEDED
FOR ADULTS AND THEN ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY THREE EMERGENCY
SHELTER TEMPORARY HOUSING
INTERVENTIONS ARE NEEDED FOR
FAMILIES.
THE ONE AREA THAT I DID WANT TO
HIGHLIGHT FOR YOU ALL A GOOD
SUCCESS STORY OR NEWS STORY IF
YOU WILL IS ON THIS CHART.
YOU'LL SEE THIRTY FIVE TRENDS
ADULT ONLY BEDS AND YOU'LL SEE
IT'S NOT IN PARENTHESES SHOWING
A DEFICIT IT'S ACTUALLY SHOWING
A SURPLUS.
SO WHEN THE FOLKS AT CCH LOOKED
AT THIS THEY LOOKED AT OUR
TEMPORARY HOUSING FOR VETERANS.
WE HAVE A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
PROGRAMS THERE CALLED GRANT PER
DIEM PROGRAMS.
THEY'RE FUNDED THROUGH THE VA
AND MICHIGAN ABILITY PARTNERS
AND SALVATION ARMY ARE THE TWO
AGENCIES THAT PROVIDE THOSE
SERVICES AND THEY LOOKED AT
THAT EXISTING STOCK AS WELL AS
SOME BEDS AT THE SHELTER
ASSOCIATION.
THE TALANA CENTER AND THEY SAID
HEY, WE HAVE FOUND THAT YOU ALL
ARE UNDER UTILIZING THIS
RESOURCE IN THIS COMMUNITY
AND
IT'S VERY INTENTIONAL WHY THAT
IS BECAUSE OVER THE LAST TWELVE
YEARS OR SO AT THE FEDERAL
LEVEL, AT THE STATE LEVEL, EVEN
AT THE LOCAL LEVEL THERE'S BEEN
DEEP INVESTMENT IN VETERAN
HOMELESSNESS THAT STARTED WITH
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
DECLARING THEY WANTED TO SEE AN
END TO VETERAN HOMELESSNESS AND
THEN THEY REALLY RESOURCED THAT
WORK.
SO WE HAVE RESOURCES TO PREVENT
EVICTIONS.
WHEN I SAID WE DON'T HAVE ANY
EVICTION RESOURCES, I SHOULD
SAY WE HAVE SOMETHING FOR
VETERANS BUT WE HAVE ROBUST
EVICTION PREVENTION RESOURCES
FOR VETERANS THAT PREVENTS OUR
VETERANS FROM EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS WHENEVER POSSIBLE.
AND THEN HUD HAS REALLY
INVESTED IN THE PROGRAM CALLED
HUD VACHE WHICH THE ENTIRE
HOUSING COMMISSION SUPPORTS IN
DOING THE HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHER PART OF THE PROGRAM AND
THE VA PROVIDES SERVICES AND
THE HUD VOUCHER PROGRAM IS
BASICALLY PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING FOR VETERANS AND THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS REALLY
ROBUSTLY FUNDED VACHE SO THAT
WE HAVE PIPELINE WE HAVE A
CONTINUUM OF CARE FOR VETERANS
.
WE DO HAVE THE KIND OF WHEN
SOMEONE IS EXPERIENCING A
CRISIS AND NEEDS EMERGENCY
SHELTER WE HAVE THAT AVAILABLE
OR WE HAVE TEMPORARY HOUSING
AVAILABLE BUT WE ALSO HAVE
THOSE PERMANENT HOUSING
RESOURCES THAT ARE AVAILABLE.
SO THIS IS A GOOD NEWS STORY
BECAUSE IT'S WORKING WELL IN
OUR SYSTEM AND IT'S A PROOF
POINT FOR ALL TYPES
OF HOMELESSNESS.
BUT IF WE ARE ABLE TO RESOURCE,
YOU KNOW, THE PREVENTION SIDE
AND THE HOUSING SIDE THAT WE
REALLY CAN FIND A WAY TO GET
OUT OF KIND OF THE CRISIS MODE
,THE EMERGENCY SHELTER NEEDS
THAT ARE THERE AND I LOOK TO
THIS AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO SAY
HEY, IN OUR COMMUNITY IF WE ARE
ABLE TO FUND THESE OTHER POINTS
AT OTHER SIDES, DIFFERENT SIDES
OF THE SYSTEM, WE MIGHT NOT
NEED AS MUCH EMERGENCY SHELTER
AS WHAT THAT REPORT SAYS
BECAUSE WE CAN MORE ROBUSTLY
HAVE RESOURCES FOR FOLKS AT
EITHER END OF THE SPECTRUM AND
THIS IS OUR DATA
THEY OVER THE
LAST DECADE THERE'S BEEN A CUT
IN VETERAN HOMELESSNESS BY 50
PERCENT.
IT'S INCREDIBLE AND YOU KNOW,
IT REALLY IS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SAY HEY, WE CAN WE KNOW WHAT
WORKS.
WE HAVE THE RESOURCES FOR
VETERANS EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT A CRISIS
OR AN EPISODE OF HOMELESSNESS
WILL NEVER HAPPEN.
FOR A VETERAN IT JUST MEANS
WERE QUICK TO RESPOND.
WE CAN GET THEM REHOUSED AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE AND TODAY
OUR DATA IS THAT ON AVERAGE IT
TAKES IT TAKES OUR COMMUNITY 86
DAYS TO HOUSE A VETERAN FROM
THE POINT AT WHICH THEY ARE
IDENTIFIED AS HOMELESS TO THE
POINT THAT THEY'RE HOUSED.
SO WITH THAT I'M GOING TO STOP
AND YOU ALL CAN ASK QUESTIONS.
>> DO WE HAVE QUESTIONS FOR OUR
PRESENTERS?
I'M GOING TO INVITE DAN KELLY
UP HERE AS WELL AND THE THREE
OF US STAY UP HERE TALKING TO
MEMBERS ON.
>> SO UM, I REALLY APPRECIATE
THE THE PAY COUNTS BECAUSE THAT
WAS THE QUESTION I THINK SOME
OF US HAVE RAISED BEFORE AND
IT'S INTERESTING THE TIMING IS
IN JANUARY WE'VE HEARD A LOT
ABOUT THE WORRY ABOUT FAMILIES
INCREASE IN FAMILIES IN BEING
EVICTED AND I APPRECIATE
COUNCIL HAD VOTED FOR THAT
BUDGET AMENDMENT BACK IN MARCH
TO HELP WITH THAT EFFORT.
>> I GUESS MY QUESTION FOR YOU
IS THAT AS WE APPROACH IN THE
NEXT BUDGET, ANTICIPATE ANOTHER
INCREASE.
RIGHT.
AND MORE FAMILIES BEING HOUSED
,HOW COULD WE BUDGET HOW DO
YOU I'M TRYING TO UNDERSTAND
THE TIMELINE OF THAT TOO.
>> RIGHT.
SO IF WE GO INTO BUDGETING IN
MAY, JUNE THAT'S SO FAR PAST
YOUR JANUARY PICK COUNT, SHOULD
WE BE THINKING ABOUT IN ANOTHER
BUDGET AMENDMENT?
I MEAN YOU'RE HERE TALKING TO
US BUT WE ALSO KNOW THAT OUR
PARTNERS AT THE COUNTY ARE ALSO
RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS WORK TO.
SO FOR ME I'M JUST TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT THE TIMING OF HOW WE
CAN BE RESPONSIVE TO TO THESE
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS KNOWING
THEIR EMERGENCY.
>> BUT THEN WE ALL WE ALSO KNOW
WHAT WHAT COUNTRY WHAT FACTORS
CONTRIBUTE TO HOMELESSNESS
RIGHT HERE WE CAN ONLY MANAGE
THE BUDGET AND ENCOURAGE OUR
PARTNERS THAT THE COUNTY AND
STATE LEVEL TO TO DO BETTER TO
DO MORE.
BUT I GUESS MY QUESTION FOR YOU
IS, YOU KNOW, HOW WOULD YOU
WHAT WOULD YOU PRESENT TO US,
YOU KNOW, SO THAT WE CAN BETTER
UNDERSTAND OR BUDGET FOR THIS
MAYBE ANTICIPATION OF THE NEXT
COUNT IN JANUARY 20 25 THEN IF
THAT'S WHAT WE HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT NOW?
>> YEAH, I THINK THE INTENT
OF THE WINTER SHELTER TASK
FORCE THIS YEAR IS TO COME UP
WITH A PLAN NOT JUST FOR THIS
WINTER BUT INTO FUTURE WINTERS
SO THAT YOU COULD MAYBE USE
THAT YOU KNOW THOSE
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE
BUDGETING IN, YOU KNOW, NEXT
SPRING FOR THE FOLLOWING WINTER
AND I WILL SAY LIKE IT IS WE
EXPECT WE'RE HOPING THAT THIS
REPORT WOULD BE DONE BY THE END
OF AUGUST.
IT'S JUST TAKING A MORE TIME TO
UNDERSTAND AND THE BIGGEST
HURDLE IS THE WE ARE RELIANT ON
COMMUNITY.
YOU KNOW, KONGREGATE SHEN'S
OTHER PLACES THAT MIGHT HAVE A
SITE AVAILABLE FOR US TO FIND
AND THEN WE'LL USE THIS WINTER
AS YOU KNOW, TESTING FOR DOES
THIS WORK DOES THIS NOT JUST AS
KIND OF THE HOTELING AND THE
STIPENDS WERE KIND OF TESTED
LAST YEAR, YOU KNOW, KIND
OF MID CRISIS.
SO I WOULD SAY LOOK TO THOSE
RECOMMENDATIONS AS YOUR GUIDE
FOR KIND OF LIKE NEXT SPRING.
>> THERE ARE GAPS IN THIS YEAR
IF THERE IS A BUDGET AMENDMENT
POSSIBLE, YOU KNOW, DAN'S TEAM
IS GOING TO FUNDRAISE ABOUT TWO
HUNDRED THOUSAND ON THEIR SIDE
OF THINGS FOR THE GAPS IN KIND
ROTATING SHELTER FOR
INDIVIDUALS AND OTHER THINGS.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF YOU WANT TO
TALK ABOUT THAT.
YEAH.
SO WE'VE GOT JUST TO GET TO OUR
WINTER SHELTER BUDGET TO GET TO
THAT.
WE TALKED EARLIER TRYING TO
HAVE 200 OH THANKS FOR HAVING
ME BY THE WAY.
SO TRY TO TO 200 PEOPLE ON A
GIVEN NIGHT WHICH WE ANTICIPATE
COULD BE THE INCREASE BASED ON
LAST YEAR'S INCREASE.
WE HAVE TO ADD ANOTHER SITE
WE'RE ADDING THIS WINTER WE HAD
IT FOR PART OF THE WINTER LAST
YEAR.
IT'S COST INTENSIVE TO HAVE
ANOTHER SITE TO GO UP TO TWO
HUNDRED PEOPLE ON A GIVEN
NIGHT.
WE'LL HAVE FOUR OR FIVE SITES
AT A GIVEN TIME BETWEEN DAYTIME
AND NIGHTTIME.
AND SO AS AMANDA SAID, IT'S A
TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR GAP
THAT WE'RE FUNDRAISING.
WE'RE GOING TO DO A PUSH FOR
THAT AT THE SHELTER ASSOCIATION
AND THAT'S PARTICULARLY BECAUSE
IF YOU LOOK AT THE WHOLE SYSTEM
NEED YOU'VE GOT THIS HUGE NEED
FOR EVICTION, PREVENTION AND
DIVERSION ON THE FAMILIES END
REALLY WHAT ULTIMATELY COMES
DOWN TO IN THE RECOMMENDATIONS
WILL DOVE INTO THE DETAILS IS
THERE'S A NEED FOR FUNDING IN
THESE AREAS AND THEN TIME TO
BUILD CAPACITY WITH THE
PROVIDERS AND THEN CITES ONE
OF OUR BIGGEST PROBLEMS RIGHT
NOW IS SITES BECAUSE AS AMANDA
MENTIONED, WE'RE RELYING ON
CONGREGATIONS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO THAT'S ANOTHER LEVER THAT IF
ANY OF OUR PARTNERS CAN PULL,
WHETHER IT'S AN SCHABIR IPSI
COUNTY CONGREGATIONAL PARTNERS,
WE'RE ALWAYS OPEN THAT BECAUSE
I THINK THAT'S GOING TO HELP A
LOT AND WE'RE TRYING TO GET OUT
THERE AND FIND NEW SITES WE'RE
STILL WORKING ON ACTIVELY RIGHT
NOW.
I WILL JUST SAY ONE MORE THING
RELATED TO THAT IS THAT DENHA I
DID DO A PRESENTATION TO COUNTY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS THAT
THEIR WORKING SESSION LAST
WEDNESDAY OF ALL ABOUT WINTER
SHELTER AND PLANNING AND SOME
OF THE GAPS.
SO IF YOU'RE CURIOUS, WE ALSO
HAVE A POWERPOINT SLIDE DECK WE
CAN GIVE TO YOU ALL.
THANK THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
BEING HERE AND FOR ALL THE WORK
THAT YOU DO ON A DAILY BASIS AS
WELL.
IF YOU COULD JUST SPEAK A
LITTLE MORE SPECIFICALLY FOR
ANYBODY WHO MIGHT BE LISTENING
AROUND WHAT THE SITE NEEDS OR
THAT YOU'RE LOOKING FOR FOR
THAT WINTER WINTER SITE FIRST
SO ON THE INDIVIDUALS AND OUR
SITE NEEDS ARE WE PRESENTED AT
THE COMMISSIONERS MEETING ON
WEDNESDAY.
WE STILL HAVE SO WE RUN LIKE I
SAID, MULTIPLE SITES ACROSS THE
COUNTY JUST TO MEET THE NEED
BECAUSE YOU CAN'T MEET IT AT
THE WHITE HOUSE CENTER WE AND
WE TURN THE ENTIRE BUILDING
INTO A SHELTER IN THE WINTER WE
CONVERT THE CAFETERIA EVERY
SPACE WE USABLE SPACE SO WE
HAVE DIFFERENT SITES.
ONE IS OUR ROTATING MODEL WHICH
IS WANTING TO PARTNER
CONGREGATIONS WHERE FIVE
CONGREGATIONS, FOUR
CONGREGATIONS SHORT PRETTY MUCH
THREE WEEKS IN FEBRUARY AND
THEN THE VERY END OF MARCH
THOSE WEEKS ARE ALL OPEN.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR
CONGREGATIONAL PARTNERS OR
HONESTLY WE CAN GET CREATIVE.
I MEAN IT'S A NON
CONGREGATIONAL PARTNER.
WE'RE OPEN EXPLORING THAT.
DO I KNOW DURING THE PANDEMIC
WE EVEN AT ONE POINT TOOK OVER
THE LRC THE WHAT COUNTY
TRAINING BUILDING AND TURNED
THAT INTO A SHELTER.
SO THAT'S ANOTHER NEED AND THEN
PROBABLY THE BIGGEST THING ON
THE INDIVIDUALS END WHICH IS
VERY URGENT IS THAT AS I
MENTIONED LAST YEAR WE LAUNCHED
A PILOT SITE IN YPSILANTI WHICH
IS GREAT.
WE'RE PARTNERING WITH THE CITY
TO PLAN AGAIN ON THIS.
I JUST PRESENTED BEFORE THEM
LAST WEEK AS WELL AND THEY'RE
VERY EXCITED ABOUT THIS
OVERNIGHT PARTNERSHIP.
HOWEVER, THE CONGREGATION WE'RE
PARTNERING WITH CAN ONLY DO
FOUR NIGHTS OUT OF THE WEEK
BECAUSE THEY HAVE WEEKEND
PROGRAMING.
THERE ARE SMALLER CONGREGATION.
IT'S ST. LUKE'S IN DOWNTOWN
IPSI BIG SHOUT OUT TO THEM FOR
DOING THAT.
HOWEVER, WE'RE MISSING THOSE
THREE NIGHTS FRIDAY, SATURDAY,
SUNDAY WE'RE TALKING ACTIVELY
WITH CONGREGATIONAL PARTNERS
AND WE JUST NEED A SITE IS
CLOSE TO ST. LUKE'S WE CAN GET
HOPEFULLY IN YPSILANTI SO THAT
WE HAVE A SITE OUT THERE SEVEN
NIGHTS A WEEK THAT WAY PEOPLE
THAT ARE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS IN YPSILANTI CAN
EASILY ACCESS A SHELTER SITE.
SO THOSE ARE PROBABLY THE TWO
BIG ONES ON THE INDIVIDUAL END
AND THEN AMANDA AND THE
FAMILIES ON AND THE FAMILIES
AND WE'RE LOOKING FOR A SITE I
JUST SAY BECAUSE WE'RE NOT
GREEDY BETWEEN 15 AND 30
FAMILIES THAT THEY COULD
SUPPORT AT ANY OF A NIGHT
IDEALLY KIND OF , YOU KNOW,
JANUARY THROUGH MARCH IS WHAT
WE'RE LOOKING FOR.
BUT WE ARE ALSO MODELING IT
AFTER A POTENTIAL TO DO
ROTATING SHELTER SO THAT I
COULD GO TO DIFFERENT
CONGREGATIONS BUT IDEALLY IT
WOULD, YOU KNOW, HAVE SOME
AREAS FOR CHILDREN, ALSO SOME
BATHING FACILITIES ALTHOUGH WE
MIGHT GET BATHING FROM THE FED
UP MINISTRIES, SHOWER AND
LAUNDRY FROM THEM AS WELL AND A
PLACE FOR MEALS.
>> SO YEAH, THANKS
.
HELPFUL.
AND THEN TO SPEAK A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT SORT OF NEEDS OR HOW
WE ASSESS PROGRESS OBVIOUSLY
WE'RE SPOKE TO WHAT QUALIFIES
AS LOW INCOME, WHAT QUALIFIES
AS YOU KNOW DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF HOMELESSNESS AND IN NEED IF
YOU COULD JUST SPEAK MISHAAL
AROUND.
>> YOU KNOW, WE'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS AROUND THIS BUT I
JUST THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
DISCUSS KIND OF THE ANIBA
HOUSING COMMISSIONS SERVICE
AREA AND KIND OF WHAT'S THE
CATCHMENT AREA THAT THE HOUSE
AND THE HOUSING COMMISSION IS
SERVING AND THEN YOU DIDN'T
NECESSARILY HAVE THAT IN THERE
BUT YOU MIGHT YOU MAY HAVE IT
IN YOUR HEAD KIND OF AN
ESTIMATE AROUND WHERE PRIMARILY
THE WHERE FOLKS ARE IN THE WAIT
LIST IN TERMS OF ZIP CODES AND
AREAS OF NEED.
THANKS FOR ASKING THAT.
I WROTE A NOTE TO MYSELF TALK
ABOUT WEIGHT LOSS.
I FORGOT THE L.A. HOUSING
COMMISSION, OUR VOUCHER AREA IS
WASHTENAW COUNTY IN MONROE
COUNTY AS A HOUSING COMMISSION,
AS A DEVELOPER OF HOUSING WE
CAN DO HOUSING ANYWHERE.
IT'S JUST A VOUCHER AREA HAS TO
BE APPROVED BY HUD SO THAT
THERE IS TOO MUCH OVERLAP WITH
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
AND JUST SO FOLKS KNOW MR. HAS
VOUCHERS IN WASHOE COUNTY
PLIMOTH HOUSING COMMISSION.
I THINK TAYLOR OUR HOUSING
COMMISSION.
SO THERE'S OTHER AREAS THAT
THERE'S VOUCHERS IN THE
COMMUNITY.
OUR WAITLIST WOULD LAST TIME WE
OPENED IT I SHOWED YOU THE
CHART WE HAVE I THINK SIX OR
SEVEN DIFFERENT KINDS
OF VOUCHERS.
OUR MAIN VOUCHER PROGRAM IN OUR
PROJECT BASED VOUCHERS ON THE
HOUSING WE OWN.
WE OPENED UP OUR WAITLIST IN
NOVEMBER OF TWENTY TWENTY.
WE HAD A LITTLE OVER FOUR
THOUSAND APPLICATIONS FOR OUR
VOUCHER WAITLIST AND A LITTLE
OVER THREE THOUSAND FOR OUR
PROJECT BASED VOUCHER WAITLIST
.
WE HAVE THREE PREFERENCES AND
SO THAT THESE ARE NATIONAL
THESE ARE PUBLISHED WHEN
ANYBODY OPENS UP THEIR WAITLIST
THERE ARE ORGANIZATIONS THAT
TRACK AND PUBLISH THIS
NATIONALLY AND SO WE'RE A
NATIONAL PROGRAM SO PEOPLE CAN
APPLY ALL OVER THE UNITED
STATES BUT WE HAVE A PREFERENCE
FOR RESIDENTS.
>> SO IF YOU LIVE OR WORK IN
WASHINGTON OR MONROE COUNTY YOU
HAVE A PREFERENCE SO THAT HELPS
PEOPLE SCREEN THEMSELVES OUT SO
THAT THEY KNOW THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO COME TO THE TOP OF THE
WAITLIST.
WE HAVE A PREFERENCE FOR ANY
HOUSEHOLD MEMBER WITH A
DISABILITY.
THEY GO UP TO THE TOP OF THE
WAITLIST AND WE HAVE A LIMITED
PREFERENCE FOR HOUSEHOLDS THAT
ARE HOMELESS.
WE WORK DIRECTLY WITH THE
CONTINUUM OF CARE IN THE
ORGANIZATIONS THAT DO THE
HOUSING ACCESS TO HAVE A
CERTAIN NUMBER RIGHT NOW ABOUT
FORTY PERCENT OF OUR UNITS
HOUSE HOMELESS HOUSEHOLDS AT
THE TIME WHEN THEY FIRST BECAME
RESIDENTS AND THEN I THINK IT'S
MORE LIKE 15 OR 20 PERCENT
OF OUR VOUCHERS PEOPLE ARE
HOMELESS AT TIME OF ADMITTANCE
SO THOSE SO THREE YEARS AGO WE
OPENED WE CURRENTLY HAVE OVER
THREE THOUSAND PEOPLE STILL
LEFT ON OUR VOUCHER WAITLIST
AND WE HAVE OVER ALMOST THREE
THOUSAND WHERE WE DIDN'T GO
DOWN VERY FAR ON THE HOUSING
THAT WE OWN AND MANAGE.
I THINK WE'RE AT TWENTY FIVE
HUNDRED.
>> WE DO HAVE A COUPLE
OF WAITLISTS THAT ARE GENERALLY
WE CONTINUE TO ADD PEOPLE IF
THEY MEET SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
SO PEOPLE CONTINUE TO CALL WE
GET ABOUT A THOUSAND CALLS A
YEAR EMAILS AND PHONE CALLS FOR
PEOPLE LOOKING FOR HOUSING AND
MOST OF THEM DON'T QUALIFY FOR
OUR TINY LITTLE OPEN WAIT LIST.
>> WE HAVE TO TURN THEM AWAY.
SO DO YOU KNOW SINCE WE'RE
SERVING MORE THAN ANN ARBOR
WITH THIS WAIT LIST, WHAT
PERCENTAGE OF THE INDIVIDUALS
WHO ARE ON THE WAIT LIST ARE
CITY RESIDENTS?
>> I DON'T KNOW THE EXACT
NUMBER BUT IT'S SMALL BECAUSE
THERE'S SO FEW PEOPLE CAN
AFFORD TO LIVE IN ANN ARBOR WHO
ARE LOW INCOME.
THEY'RE ALREADY NOT LIVING IN
ANN ARBOR.
SO WHEN WE OPEN UP OUR
WAITLIST, THE WASHTENAW COUNTY
FOLKS ON THE WAITLIST TEND TO
BE OUTSIDE OF THE CITY LIMITS
MORE LIKELY TO BE IPSI CITY
OF C TOWNSHIP THAN CITY THAN
ARBOR COUNCIL MEMBER GOSIA
,
THANK YOU.
THIS WAS REALLY INFORMATIVE.
>> SO THANK YOU ALL FOR BEING
HERE TONIGHT.
>> SO YOU WERE JUST SAYING THAT
ALTHOUGH THERE'S A SMALL
MINORITY OF FOLKS THAT ACTUALLY
LIVE IN ANN ARBOR THAT'S NOT TO
SAY THAT'S MANY OF THEM MAY
WORK IN ANN ARBOR.
CORRECT.
SO THEY JUST CAN'T AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE BUT THEY MADE THEY
ARE CONTRIBUTING TO THE
ECONOMY.
>> THANK I WANTED TO ASK
SOMETHING AROUND DISABILITY
WHICH I KNOW THAT YOU AND I
HAVE TALKED A LOT ABOUT AND
PRIORITIZING PEOPLE WITH A
DISABILITY AND CAN YOU SHARE A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT HOW YOU MATCH
FOLKS TO UNITS THAT ARE
ACCESSIBLE?
YEAH, THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
SO TWO PARTS OF THAT WHEN I SAY
WE HAVE A PREFERENCE SO PEOPLE
SELF IDENTIFY WHEN THEY APPLY
THEY OR SOMEONE ELSE IN THEIR
FAMILY HAS A DISABILITY AND IT
CAN BE ALL KINDS OF DISABILITY
.
IT DOESN'T MEAN YOU HAVE A NEED
FOR SOME KIND OF PHYSICAL
ACCESSIBILITY CAN BE OTHER
KINDS OF DISABILITY WHEN YOU'RE
PULLED ONCE YOU'RE PULLED OFF
THE WAITLIST, PEOPLE WHO HAVE A
DISABILITY AND RESIDENTS OR
WORKERS IN THE COMMUNITY GO TO
THE TOP OF THE WAITLIST AND SO
ONCE YOU'RE PULLED OFF WE HAVE
TO VERIFY WHATEVER IT IS.
IF YOU SAY YOU GET A DISABILITY
AND YOU REALLY DON'T HAVE
ANYONE YOUR FAMILY, YOU GO BACK
ON THE WAITLIST IF YOU'RE
PULLED FOR HOUSING THAT WE OWN,
WE FIND OUT FROM YOUR FAMILY
WHAT YOUR NEEDS ARE, NOT JUST
WHO'S IN YOUR HOUSEHOLD AGES,
GENDER OF YOUR KIDS OR YOU
KNOW, DIFFERENT MEMBERS OF YOUR
HOUSEHOLD BUT ALSO DOES ANYBODY
HAVE ANY SPECIAL NEEDS?
AND SO THEN WE HAVE TO MATCH
YOU UP.
IF WE HAVE A THREE BEDROOM
OPEN, WE PULL YOU OFF OUR THREE
BEDROOM LIST.
IF YOU END UP NEEDING A SOME
KIND OF PHYSICAL ACCESSIBILITY,
HOPEFULLY THAT UNIT DOES SINCE
WE WHEN WE DID OUR RAD
CONVERSIONS, ONE OF THE REASONS
WE DID A LOT OF DEMO AND NEW
CONSTRUCTION IS BECAUSE THE
CONDITION OF THE BUILDINGS BUT
ALSO WHEN WE BUILT NEW WE ADDED
A LARGE NUMBER OF PHYSICAL
ACCESSIBLE UNITS WITH NO STEP
ENTRIES WITH FIRST FLOOR
BEDROOMS, FIRST FLOOR BATHROOM
SO THAT WE HAD A LARGER NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT UNITS THAT MEET
THERE.
SO IF WE DON'T HAVE A UNIT IN
YOUR BEDROOM SIZE THAT HAS YOUR
NEEDS, WE CAN EITHER MAKE
MODIFICATIONS IF IT'S POSSIBLE.
SOMETIMES IT'S NOT OR WE LOOK
TO SEE IF WE HAVE ANY UNITS
THAT MEET YOUR SPECIFICATIONS
THAT SOMEBODY IS LIVING THERE
THAT DOESN'T NEED THAT UNIT,
WHATEVER THAT ACCESSIBLE
FEATURE IS.
AND SO FROM HUD'S PERSPECTIVE
WE HAVE TO ACTUALLY RELOCATE A
FAMILY WHO DOESN'T NEED AN
ACCESSIBLE UNIT WHATEVER THAT
ACCESSIBILITY IS TO IN ORDER TO
PUT SOMEBODY IN WHO DOES NEED
IT AND WE ACTUALLY HAVE TO PAY
FOR THE MOVEMENT OF THAT FAMILY
TO GO TO A NEW UNIT SO WE TRACK
IT FOR OURSELVES ON THE VOUCHER
SIDE WE DO NOT HAVE A LIST
OF WHAT'S AVAILABLE IN THE
COMMUNITY AND WHAT KIND
OF ACCESSIBLE FEATURES ARE
AVAILABLE IN THE COMMUNITY
.
AND I KNOW THAT YOU AND I HAVE
TALKED A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
DETROIT HOME CONNECT WHICH IS
THE WEBSITE THAT THE CITY
OF DETROIT HAS HELPED TO FUND
AND PUBLISH THAT HAS ALL THE
AFFORDABLE UNITS LISTED.
IT HAS UNITS IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU BOTH ARE
FAMILIAR THEN IT HAS A FEATURES
THAT AROUND ACCESSIBILITY AND I
KNOW THAT THE LISTENING PUBLIC
HAS BEEN REALLY HELPFUL TO
HOUSING PROVIDERS AND I
RECENTLY SPOKE ON A PANEL THERE
WERE HOUSING PROVIDERS THERE
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
COULD THERE BE SUCH A LIST HERE
?
COULD YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT TRACKING THAT INFORMATION
AND WHETHER MAKING IT PUBLIC IS
A POSSIBILITY?
>> UM, THE DIFFICULTY IS
GETTING LANDLORDS TO SHARE THAT
INFORMATION AND SO AS THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR WE HAVE OUR OWN
RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM.
SO I THINK THE EASIEST WAY TO
FIND OUT WHAT'S IN ANN ARBOR IS
THROUGH OUR OWN RENTAL
INSPECTION PROGRAM.
BUT AS I SAID EARLIER, MOST
OF OUR VOUCHERS ARE NOT
ACTUALLY UTILIZED IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
SO IT'S MORE CHALLENGING TO GET
VOLUNTARY INFORMATION.
OTHER COMMUNITIES, SOME OTHER
COMMUNITIES ALSO HAVE RENTAL
INSPECTION PROGRAMS.
SO I BELIEVE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
AND YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP AND JUST
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP TOO.
SO MOST OF THEM DO SO IF WE
COULD PARTNER WITH THEM TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET THAT
INFORMATION.
THE QUESTION IS HOW DO YOU
SOMEBODY HAS TO GATHER IT,
SOMEONE HAS TO ENTER IT AND
SOMEONE HAS TO UPDATE IT AND SO
LIKE THAT WE DON'T HAVE THE
STAFFING FOR BUT IF THAT WAS
AVAILABLE AND IT WAS AVAILABLE
TO THE COMMUNITY, IT WOULD
DEFINITELY BE BENEFICIAL TO
FOLKS WHO ARE LOOKING FOR SURE
.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBERS ON I
THINK WE CAN RECOGNIZE THAT OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS PARTICIPATE IN
SCHOOLS OF CHOICE SO WE KNOW
NONRESIDENTS ARE BENEFITING ARE
PROBABLY ON THE WAIT LIST
BECAUSE THEIR KIDS ARE COMING
OUT FROM SCHOOLS OF CHOICE
RIGHT.
>> SO AMANDA, YOU KNOW YOU WORK
WITH FAMILIES.
I KNOW THE MCKINNEY VENTO ACT
IS IS IS THE FEDERAL PROVISIONS
FOR HOMELESS FAMILIES TO
PROVIDE FOR TRANSPORTATION TO
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
>> CAN YOU KIND OF SPEAK TO HOW
OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS WORKS WITHIN
THIS CONTINUUM OF CARE EVEN
THOUGH THEY'RE NOT RESIDENTS
AND HOW IT IMPACTS?
>> I'M GOING TO LET AMANDA
SPEAK.
BUT JUST AS AN ASIDE, MCKINNEY
VENTO IS THE ACTIVE PS FOR
CONTINUUM OF CARE FUNDS AS WELL
PASSED ON MY BIRTHDAY JULY 26
BUT IN 1987 SO NOT MY YEAR BUT
YES SO WE HAVE SO
THE WASHTENAW
INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL DISTRICT
KIND OF OVERSEES WHAT'S CALLED
THE HOMELESS YOUTH PROJECT AND
THEY ALSO HAVE CONNECTIONS WITH
ALL OF THE MCKINNEY VENTO
LIAISON'S IN DIFFERENT SCHOOLS
THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY.
>> OFTENTIMES MS.
MCKINNEY EVENTUALLY IS ON MIGHT
BE THE SCHOOL SECRETARY MIGHT
NOT ALWAYS BE A SCHOOL SOCIAL
WORKER.
SO THERE'S VARIOUS LEVELS
OF RESOURCE AND TIME MADE TO
HELPING HOMELESS FAMILIES.
BUT IN ANN ARBOR APS THEY HAVE
A COORDINATOR AS DOES IPSI
COMMUNITY SCHOOLS THAT HAS A
COORDINATOR AS WELL.
AND SO THOSE FOLKS ARE PART
OF A CONTINUUM OF CARE AND
DIFFERENT COMMITTEES THAT WE
WORK ON ESPECIALLY COORDINATED
ENTRY WHEN WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
FAMILIES.
BUT YOU KNOW, HOW ARE THEY
ACCESSING THE DIFFERENT
SERVICES THAT MIGHT BE
AVAILABLE TO THEM SO THEY ARE
INTEGRATED.
I THINK WE CAN ALWAYS DO A
BETTER JOB OF THAT BUT THEY ARE
INTEGRATED INTO THE CONTINUUM
OF CARE AND SO THAT WE CAN KIND
OF HEAR FROM THEM ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, WHAT THE NEEDS ARE FOR
INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES.
>> AND THEN I'LL ALSO SAY WE
HAVE KIND OF A BIWEEKLY MEETING
WHERE WE LOOK AT THE BY NAME
LIST OF ALL OF OUR FAMILIES
THAT ARE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS WITH COMMUNITY
PARTNERS THERE, DEFINITELY THE
HOUSING PROVIDERS THERE.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE DHHS WHERE
THEY CAN HELP US WITH, YOU
KNOW, KPS PREVENTION CASES.
MAYBE THERE'S RESOURCES THAT WE
CAN HAVE AND SO THERE'S A LOT
OF WORK TO BE DONE OR THAT IS
BEING DONE WITHIN THOSE
MEETINGS AROUND KIND OF CASE
CONFERENCING FAMILY SITUATIONS
AND FINDING THE BEST YOU KNOW,
HOUSING OPTION FOR THOSE
FAMILIES.
>> HEY, I APPRECIATE IT.
>> I HAVE THREE MORE QUESTIONS
IF THAT'S OK.
YEAH, OK.
>> SO ONE SO I BRING A COPY
OF THE WASH AFFORDABILITY AND
ECONOMIC EQUITY ANALYSIS FROM
2015 WITH ME AT ALL TIMES JUST
IN CASE SHOULD I MEET ANYONE
WHO'S CURIOUS ABOUT THE 2015
RECOMMENDATION WHICH INCLUDED
AT THAT TIME YOU KNOW REZONING
INCLUSIONARY ZONING
INCENTIVIZED ZONING AS BEING
HIGH IMPACT POLICY DECISIONS
THAT WE CAN MAKE TO INCREASE
EQUITY AND ACCESSIBILITY TO
HOUSING EDUCATION SKILLS AT
THAT TIME AND I LIKE HOW WE WE
PRETEND WHEN WE HAVE OUR ZONING
DISCUSSIONS LIKE THIS IS ALL
NEW AND REVOLUTIONARY BUT IT'S
BEEN DECADES THAT WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT THIS.
>> SO I GUESS MY QUESTION FOR
YOU IS WHEN WILL THAT BE
UPDATED AND IS THAT FROM THE
COUNTY BECAUSE THINGS HAVE
CHANGED FROM 2015 A LITTLE BIT
RIGHT WITH THE PANDEMIC AND IF
IT IS BEING UPDATED, COULD WE
ALSO GET DATA OR INFORMATION
HOW OUR MONEY HAS HAS IMPACTED
I MEAN WE'RE JUST GETTING INTO
CONCLUSIONARY OUR OWN THING.
RIGHT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME BE
INTERESTING TO SEE HOW LIKE
ARPA MONEY HAS IMPACTED OUR
HOUSING WORK AND THE FEDERAL
MONIES.
RIGHT.
LIKE THE FEDERAL PROGRAMS LIKE
EVICTION MORATORIUM IN THIS
ANALYSIS.
>> IS THAT IS THAT ON YOUR WISH
TOO OR IS IT JUST ME IMAGINING
THAT THIS WILL HAPPEN IN THIS?
>> YEAH, IT'S ON OUR WISH WISH
LIST AS WELL.
THAT GRANT THAT I MENTIONED
EARLIER THAT WE'RE APPLYING FOR
WITH THE CITY OF YPSILANTI,
THAT'S ONE OF THE ITEMS WE HAVE
ON OUR GRANT APPLICATION TO
UPDATE I DON'T KNOW IF THE
COUNTY HAS IT ON THEIR TO DO
LIST ASKED THE COUNTY.
>> I DON'T KNOW.
>> OK, AND WHAT WAS YOUR I'M
SORRY WHAT WAS YOUR SECOND PART
OF THAT QUESTION?
OH YEAH.
OH INCLUDING THAT IN THE
ANALYSIS AND THEN MY MY OTHER
QUESTION SO CAN YOU CAN I SPEAK
TO THE DEEDS ROLE IN IN OUR
WORK IN PROVIDING MORE HOUSING
UNITS BEFORE THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING VILLAGE AND THEN THE
INVESTMENTS THAT THEY'VE MADE
AFTER THE VILLAGE HAS PASSED.
UM SO FOR THOSE WHO DON'T KNOW
THE DDA I FORGET WHAT YEAR IT
WAS BUT IT MAY BE FOUR OR FIVE
YEARS TO GO.
>> THERE WAS WRITTEN INTO THEIR
I THINK IT WAS SOMETHING
NEGOTIATED BUT WITH CITY
COUNCIL TO PUT THREE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS A YEAR INTO AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND AND
THAT INCREASES I FORGET WHAT
THE FORMULA IS BUT IT INCREASES
EVERY YEAR THIS YEAR IT'S LIKE
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY OR
EIGHTY THOUSAND THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THE YEARS PREVIOUS
TO THAT THEY USE THE FUNDS.
A LOT OF IT WENT TO THE HOUSING
COMMISSION WHEN WE REDEVELOPED
OUR PROPERTIES UNDER THE RED
CONVERSION PROGRAM.
I WANT TO SAY I FORGET MY SLIDE
WAS ON THERE SOMEWHERE.
IT WAS LIKE OVER A COUPLE
OF MILLION DOLLARS.
THE MONEY CAN ONLY BE USED
WITHIN THE DISTRICT OR I JUST
BLANKED ON WHAT THE IT'S JUST A
QUARTER MILE.
THANK YOU.
A QUARTER MILE WITHIN THE
OUTSIDE OF THE BOUNDARIES
OF THE DDA DISTRICT.
SO FOR US THAT JUST TOUCHES
MILLER MANOR FOR EXAMPLE AND
JUST TOUCHES LURIE TERRACE AND
I KNOW AVALON HAS RECEIVED
FUNDING TO RENOVATE THERE.
THEY HAVE THREE OR FOUR
PROPERTIES IN IN AND AROUND THE
DOWNTOWN.
SINCE THEN THOUGH, EVEN SINCE
THE MILLAGE THE DDA SPENT LESS
THAN A MILLION MORE THAN SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS TO
UPGRADE THE WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WAS NEEDED
TO SUPPORT CATHERINE STREET.
AND SO WHILE THEY HAD THEY WERE
DOING OTHER WORK AND THEY WERE
MOVING THE BIKE LANE THEY ALSO
PUT IN AND UPGRADED THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S HUGE,
HUGE, HUGE, HUGE.
THAT CAN BE MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
DEPENDING ON WHERE THE SITE IS,
WHETHER YOU HAVE TO UPGRADE
SEWER WATER.
THEY'VE ALSO PUT IN FUNDING FOR
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN ABOVE
GROUND.
SO SIDEWALKS, TREES AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
THEY'VE ALSO PUT ALLOCATE I
WANT TO SAY IT'S ABOUT TWO
MILLION DOLLARS TOWARD
INFRASTRUCTURE AT THREE FIFTY
FIFTH AS WELL.
SO THAT'S IN ADDITION TO THAT
ANNUAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND,
THE INFRASTRUCTURE FUNDING
COMES OUT OF THERE TIF FUNDING
THAT THEY GET OK, SO VERY BIG.
>> SO MY LAST QUESTION IS IF IF
WE WERE TO MEET WITH THE HEAD
OF MR. AND SAY SOME OF US ARE
ON THE POLICY ACTION COMMITTEE
HERE SO MYSELF COUNCIL MEMBERS
WATSON, HARRISON, IHRE DENHA,
WHAT WOULD YOU LIKE US TO TELL
THEM?
HOW COULD WE IMPROVE THIS
PROCESS?
>> IS IT IS IT REALLY THE ISSUE
OF TIMING AND FUNDING BEING
RELEASED, THE APPLICATION
PROCESS ITSELF?
>> WHAT ARE WHAT ARE WAYS
OF IMPROVEMENT THAT WE CAN
ADVOCATE FOR?
I'LL TALK ABOUT THE HOUSING
SIDE WHICH IS A DIFFERENT PART
OF MR THAN THE HOMELESSNESS
SIDE AND I'VE HAD THIS
CONVERSATION AND ACTUALLY WITH
THE NEW DIRECTOR AMY HARVEY
MITCHELL IS MIRED IN CENTURIES
PAST THAT DOESN'T WORK FOR THE
CURRENT SITUATION.
>> PEOPLE ARE IN SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT THEY HAVE.
I MEAN I'M A BUREAUCRAT.
WE LIKE TO LAYER BIG
BUREAUCRACY ON TOP
OF BUREAUCRACY THAT'S NOT
ALWAYS NEEDED BECAUSE YOU'RE
TRYING TO SOLVE A TINY LITTLE
PROBLEM AND SO YOU CREATE
LAYERS OF DIFFICULTIES
ACHIEVING THINGS.
SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT THEY
DO IS IF YOU USE CERTAIN TYPES
OF FUNDS IN ADDITION TO NOT NOT
NINE PERCENT TAX CREDIT
FINANCING BUT OTHER KINDS
OF FUNDS THAT MR HAS, IT'S LIKE
GAP FINANCING.
THEY HAVE DESIGN GUIDELINES
THAT YOU HAVE TO FOLLOW.
THEY'RE VERY MUCH GEARED TOWARD
WALK UP SUBURBAN THREE STOREY
APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
THEY HAVE VERY HIGH PARKING
REQUIREMENTS.
THEY HAVE A MINIMUM UNIT SIZES
.
THEY HAVE REQUIREMENTS THAT
DON'T FIT LIKE AN URBAN
DOWNTOWN.
>> AND LIKE I SAID, I TALKED TO
THE DIRECTOR.
SHE'S AWARE OF IT AND SHE'S
HEARING THAT FROM OTHER
DEVELOPERS AS WELL.
THEY ALSO HAVE VERY RESTRICTIVE
AND EXPENSIVE FINANCING WHEN
YOU IF YOU WANT TO DO BOND
FINANCING WITH THEM, WHICH IS
WHY WE ARE UNABLE TO UTILIZE
THEIR BOND FINANCING, WHICH IS
WHY I KEEP COMING BACK LOCALLY.
WELL, HOW CAN WE DO THIS
LOCALLY?
THOSE ARE TWO BIG ISSUES WHICH
I'VE ALSO TALKED TO THEIR BOND
COUNCIL AND IN MANY PEOPLE THAT
WORK THERE IT'S JUST A VERY BIG
BUREAUCRACY THAT'S VERY SLOW
MOVING.
>> BUT THOSE ARE ISSUES THAT
ARE AFFECTING DEVELOPMENT
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
UM, CAN I JUST ADD ON TO THAT
FOR HOMELESS?
SO ONE ADDITIONAL THING THAT I
THINK WOULD BE REALLY
BENEFICIAL IS MR. OUTSOURCES
ITS HOUSING VOUCHER MANAGEMENT
TO PRIVATE ENTITIES AND THEY DO
A GREAT THING.
THEY PRIORITIZE THEIR VOUCHERS
FOR PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS BUT OFTEN TIMES
WHEN FOLKS ARE IN CRISIS THEY
NEED ADDITIONAL ASSISTANCE TO
HELP THEM THROUGH THE VOUCHER
PROCESS AND BY OUTSOURCING TO
ENTITIES THAT ARE NOT WITHIN A
COUNTY THAT ARE PRIVATE
ENTITIES SOMETIMES FOLKS HAVE
TO THEN GO THROUGH AN APPEAL
PROCESS BECAUSE THEY WERE
DENIED THEIR VOUCHER OR IT TOOK
TOO LONG AND SO THAT IS JUST
ONE THING THAT WE ARE DOING
SOME ADVOCACY ON IS TO SEE IF
THE MISTA COULD BRING THAT WORK
IN-HOUSE AGAIN AND BE ABLE TO
SERVE THE CLIENTS THAT ARE
RECEIVING HOUSING CHOICE
VOUCHERS IN A BETTER WAY.
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR THESE PRESENTATIONS.
IT'S REALLY I'M MADLY TAKING
NOTES AND KICKING MYSELF FOR
EVEN FEELING TEMPTED TO FEEL
OVERWHELMED BECAUSE I'M NOT
DOING THE WORK YOU GUYS ARE BUT
SO I HAVE TWO QUESTIONS AND ONE
IS FOR MISS HALL AND ONE IS
I
THINK EITHER MR. KELLY OR MRS.
CARLYLE EITHER VIEW THE AS HALL
I AM CANVASING ACTUALLY THESE
DAYS JUST TO YOU KNOW, YOU GO
AROUND ASKING PEOPLE WHAT
THEY'RE THINKING AND SOME
PEOPLE ARE EXPRESSING CONCERN
THAT WE COUNCIL MEMBERS HAVE
NOT TOLD THEM THE TRUTH ABOUT
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT SEEING
UNITS AND I OF COURSE, YOU
KNOW, TELL HOW HARD WE ARE
WORKING.
YOU ARE WORKING.
IS THERE ANYTHING WE CAN DO TO
ACCELERATE GETTING UNITS BUILT
IF WE CAN FIGURE OUT HOW TO DO
LOCAL BOND FINANCING THAT WILL
HELP JUST SO THAT EVERYBODY
KNOWS ANIBA WHO MIGHT BE
LISTENING FROM THE TIME YOU
HAVE THE CON SCEPTER IDEA
OF DOING A DEVELOPMENT ALL THE
TIME YOU HAVE CERTIFICATES
OF OCCUPANCY AND PEOPLE MOVING
IN CAN TAKE THREE, FOUR, FIVE,
SIX PLUS YEARS PARTICULARLY ON
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING SIDE
BECAUSE IT TAKES ROUGHLY TWO
YEARS TO SECURE ALL YOUR
FUNDING AND THAT'S ASSUMING
YOU'VE SECURED THE SITE BECAUSE
YOU HAVE TO SECURE YOUR SITE
BEFORE YOU CAN SECURE FINANCING
AND THEN IT'S TWO YEARS TO
BUILD ROUGHLY FETS NEW
CONSTRUCTION.
SO THAT'S WHAT TAKES SO LONG
DOING ACQUISITION WOULD BE
FASTER BUT YOU WOULD
THEORETICALLY IF YOU HAD ENOUGH
MONEY AND COULD COMPETE AND HAD
A EVEN IN THE ACQUISITION I
HAVE EXTRA LAYERS OF APPROVAL
PROCESSES SO THE SIX UNITS THAT
WE ACQUIRED I KNEW THE SELLER
THE SELLER WAS WILLING TO WORK
WITH ME IF I DIDN'T KNOW THE
SELLER FOR SIXTEEN TINY LITTLE
UNITS THEY WOULDN'T HAVE SOLD
IT TO ME.
I HAD TO GET APPROVAL.
I HAD TO GET THE FUNDING
TOGETHER.
I HAD TO GET APPROVALS FROM MY
BOARD.
I HAD TO COME TO CITY COUNCIL
AND GET APPROVALS SO IT DOES
TAKE LONGER.
SO YOU HAVE TO HAVE SOMEONE
WILLING TO WAIT AND YOU'RE NOT
ADDING ANY ADDITIONAL UNITS.
THAT'S THE OTHER CHALLENGE
OF DOING ACQUISITION.
YOU CAN THEORETICALLY PRESERVE
IT AS AFFORDABLE BUT YOU'RE NOT
DEALING WITH THE REAL
MARKETPLACE SQUEEZE IF YOU'RE
NOT ADDING NEW UNITS.
OK, SO EXCUSE ME.
SO ADDING NEW UNITS AT LEAST
MEANS THAT WE WOULD HAVE FEWER
THAN NINE HUNDRED NINETY ONE
UNITS LOST.
RIGHT WHICH IS GOOD SINCE
THEY'RE GOING OUT ON ONE SIDE
AND WE'RE TRYING TO BUILD THEM
UP ON THE OTHER.
BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE SO SINCE YOU
DO HAVE THE SITES THE AT LEAST
THE ONES THAT YOU'RE BUILDING
THEM FOR THE CITY THERE'S AT
LEAST THAT BUT IT'S MINIMUM
FOUR YEARS AND PROBABLY MORE TO
BUILD THE HEART BECAUSE THE
CAPITAL STACKS ARE SO DIVERSE
AND JUST MULTIPLIES THE
REGULATIONS THAT YOU'RE GOING
THROUGH RIGHT.
AND IF I'M I CAN'T I MEAN I
COULD BUT IT'D BE DUMB I COULD
COMPETE WITH MYSELF FOR THE
SAME FUNDING SOURCES BUT
THERE'S ONLY SO MUCH OUT THERE
WHICH IS AGAIN WHY LOOKING AT
DOING BONFANTE AND SEEING WITH
MILLAGE IS NOT ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT OF A PAYBACK BUT
SUPPLEMENTING RENTS WOULD ALLOW
MORE FUNDING TO COME IN SOONER
THAN EACH YEAR.
RIGHT NOW THE MILLAGE IS ABOUT
SEVEN MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR.
PART OF THAT GOES TO STAFFING
COSTS LITERALLY TO DO THE WORK
THAT WE'RE DOING AND PART OF IT
IS ALREADY GOING TO SERVICES.
ONE OF THE ATTACHMENTS TO THIS
PRESENTATION TONIGHT SHOWS THE
DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECTS THAT
HAVE BEEN FUNDED INCLUDING TWO
OF AVALON'S PROJECTS.
ONE, IT'S BEEN PARTIALLY BUILT
OR TWO THIRDS BUILT WHICH IS
HICKORY WASTE.
THE OTHER IS UNDERWAY WHICH IS
VIRIDIAN AT THE COUNTY FARM
PARK KATHERINE THREE FIFTY S
FIFTH AS WELL AS THE SIXTEEN
UNITS WE JUST ACQUIRED AT
LIBERTY.
ALSO IF WE WERE ABLE TO HAVE
MORE FUNDING SOONER WE COULD
ALSO NOT JUST FUND THE PROJECTS
THAT WE'RE DOING BUT OTHER
PROJECTS THAT ARE BEING IN THE
PIPELINE OR IN THE CONCEPT
PHASE OR WHATEVER IT IS THAT
OTHERS ARE WORKING ON RIGHT
NOW.
THE AMOUNT IS SO TINY THAT I'M
HATE TO SAY BECAUSE I DON'T
WANT TO HOARD FUNDS BUT I'M NOT
EVEN FEEL LIKE I'M HURTING.
I JUST LIKE THE GAP JUST
FILLING THE GAP ONE YEAR'S
WORTH OF MONEY TO FILL THE GAP
AT KATHERINE WAS THE ENTIRE
YEAR IT TOOK A WHOLE YEAR'S
WORTH OF JUST TO FILL THE GAP
AT KATHERINE WITH TWELVE OF THE
OTHER FUNDING SOURCES.
>> IT'S JUST REALLY CHALLENGING
RIGHT NOW.
YEAH.
SO JUST AGAIN TO MAKE SURE THAT
I'M COMPLETELY UNDERSTANDING
IT'S REALLY BONDING IS THE KEY
HERE BECAUSE THAT LETS YOU GET
MORE MONEY SOONER JUST LIKE
WHAT WE'VE DONE WITH THE ROADS
WE'RE NOT WAITING FOR IT TO
COME IN.
OK AND VIRIDIAN HAS BROKEN
GROUND.
>> YEAH GREAT.
THEY CLOSE I WANT TO SAY TWO OR
THREE WEEKS AGO ON THEIR
FINANCING SO THEY SHOULD BE
BREAKING GROUND.
WHAT YOU SEE OUT THERE RIGHT
NOW IS THE MARKET RATE SIDE
THAT'S BROKEN GROUND AND IS
GOING VERTICAL BUT THE AVALON
PORTION THEY JUST CLOSED ON
THEIR FINANCING SO YOU'LL SEE
ON THEIR PORTION AS WELL SOON.
EXCELLENT.
THAT'S OK.
SO THEN MY OTHER QUESTION COMES
FROM A CONVERSATION I'VE BEEN
HAVING WITH A RESIDENT AND I'VE
BEEN GETTING A LOT OF WELL NOT
A LOT BUT MORE THAN ONE FROM
DIFFERENT PEOPLE CONCERNS ABOUT
FOLKS SLEEPING IN PARKS AND SO
I HAVE TWO QUESTIONS.
ONE IS IS IT TRUE THAT ANN
ARBOR HAS ENOUGH HOUSING
ACCOMMODATION TO HOUSE
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE SLEEPING
OVERNIGHT IN OUR PARKS AND
WOULD IT BE TRUE WOULD IT BE
TRUE YEAR ROUND OR WOULD IT
JUST BE TRUE IN CERTAIN
SEASONS?
CONFIRM WHAT YOU'VE SAID
TONIGHT?
I DON'T THINK IT'S TRUE IN THE
WINTER THAT WE HAVE ENOUGH
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION SO THAT'S
QUESTION ONE AND FEEL FREE TO
ELABORATE.
QUESTION TWO IS SOME RESIDENTS
BELIEVE THAT IF WE HAVE
ACCOMMODATION SPACE PEOPLE
SHOULD BE REMOVED FROM PUBLIC
SPACES AT NIGHT WHETHER OR NOT
THEY WANT TO GO.
WOULD YOU HAVE ANY ADVICE ON
THE PROS AND CONS OF SUCH A
POLICY?
YEAH, APPRECIATE THE QUESTION
WHEN YOU SAY HOUSING
ACCOMMODATION YOU MEAN SHELTER
MYRTACEAE OH YEAH.
SO AS WE HEARD EARLIER IN THE
WINTER MONTHS WE DO HAVE A
COMMITMENT TO HAVE ENOUGH
SHELTER ACCOMMODATIONS FOR
EVERYBODY.
IT'S VERY BASIC OBVIOUSLY LIKE
I SAID WE'LL CONVERT OUR
CAFETERIA, WE'LL DO ANYTHING ON
SITES ALL OVER THE ENTIRE
COUNTY.
SO FROM NOVEMBER THE SECOND
WEEK IN NOVEMBER UNTIL THE END
OF MARCH ISH LOOK A LITTLE BIT
LONGER IF WE'RE ABLE TO IF WE
HAVE SITES WE WILL HAVE ENOUGH
ACCOMMODATION FOR ANYBODY.
SO STREET OUTREACH WE WORK
REALLY CLOSELY WITH THAT'S THE
PATH OUTREACH TEAM RUN BY CMH.
THEY'LL GO OUT AND THEY'LL TALK
TO FOLKS WHO ARE STAYING IN
PARKS AND AREAS AND WORK WITH
APD AND THE SHERIFF'S OFFICE ON
THAT AS WELL.
AND WHEN FOLKS ARE IDENTIFIED
WE'LL GO OUT AND LET THEM KNOW
IN THE WINTER MONTHS THAT IS
READILY AVAILABLE.
HOWEVER, IN THE WINTER MONTHS
SO FROM APRIL UNTIL THAT SECOND
WEEK IN NOVEMBER WE'RE WOEFULLY
SHORT ON BEDS AS AMANDA SHARED.
I'M ACTUALLY THAT FIFTY EIGHT I
WOULD LOVE THOSE FIFTY EIGHT
ALTHOUGH I'D REALLY LOVE SOME
MORE HOUSING FIRST BUT WE DON'T
EVEN NEED IT.
BUT THE IN THE NON WINTER
MONTHS WE HAVE A TRIAGE LIST ON
THE INDIVIDUALS END AND THAT
LIST IN TYPICAL YEARS IT'S IT'S
ABOUT 40 TO 60 PEOPLE WAITING
FOR A BED ANOTHER REASON WHY WE
THINK WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
RECORD NUMBER THIS WINTER IS
THAT'S BALLOONED TO OVER ONE
HUNDRED.
SO AT THIS MOMENT WE HAVE OVER
ONE HUNDRED PEOPLE WHO ARE
INDIVIDUAL THAT ARE ACTIVELY
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS WHO
WANT A BED.
THEY'RE CHECKING IN EVERY WEEK
FOR A BED AND WE'RE HAVING TO
PRIORITIZE THEM AND IT'S IT'S A
REALLY SAD PROCESS THAT WE HAVE
TO DO THIS AT ALL UP AND HAVE
ENOUGH BEDS.
BUT WHAT WE DO IS WE AS A
MANDATORY WE USE THE SPEED AT
THE SERVICE PRIORITIZATION
DECISION ASSISTANCE TOOL TO
HELP US LOOK AT REALLY ANYBODY
ON THE STREET HAS A NEED BUT
YOU DO JUST FOR THE SAKE OF THE
LACK OF RESOURCES YOU SORT AND
THEN SOMEBODY IF SOMEBODY HAS A
REALLY ACUTE NEED LIKE GIVE AN
EXAMPLE IF SOMEONE IS ON THE
STREETS RECENTLY WE HAD
SOMEBODY WHO WAS TRYING TO DO
CANCER TREATMENT AND THE DOCTOR
WOULDN'T START UNTIL THEY HAD
SHELTER SO WE PRIORITIZED THAT
PERSON FOR THE BED BEFORE
OTHERS GOT THEM IN FOR A BED.
SO I DON'T KNOW WHERE THAT
INFORMATION WAS HEARD.
BUT FOR RESIDENTS IN THE
COMMUNITY WE DEFINITELY DON'T
HAVE BEDS.
DO YOU HAVE ANY COMMENT ON THIS
IDEA THAT SNOW DURING THE
WINTER MONTHS WHETHER OR NOT
PEOPLE WANT TO BE IN A SHELTER
,OUGHT THEY OUGHT THEY BE
REQUIRED TO I MEAN I WILL SAY
IN THE WINTER MONTHS OUR
STREET, OUR STREET COUNT WHICH
I'M REALLY PROUD OF , THE
NUMBER IS VERY, VERY LOW.
>> AMANDA, THE OTHER DAY ABOUT
TWENTY THAT WE FOUND I DO IT
EVERY YEAR WE GO OUT.
IT'S THE THIRD WEDNESDAY IN
JANUARY WE DID THE MIDDLE AT
NIGHT LIKE SEVEN TO THREE A.M.
I SWEAR IT'S ALWAYS THE COLDEST
DAY OF THE YEAR.
IT'S IT'S LIKE I DON'T KNOW
WHAT THE WEATHER GUYS ARE DOING
OR SOMETHING BUT IT'S ALWAYS
THE COLDEST DAY AND YEAH LAST
YEAR WAS TWENTY PEOPLE SO IT IS
REALLY LOW.
>> NO WE WANT TO GET OUT IN THE
STREETS AND ACTIVELY ENGAGE
WITH THOSE FOLKS ON STREET
OUTREACH DOES A GOOD JOB WITH
THAT AND THEY WORK REALLY
CLOSELY WITH US AT THE SHELTER.
IN FACT OUR HOUSING DIRECTOR
WAS THE STREET OUTREACH LEAD
BEFORE SHE CAME HERE SO THEY'RE
TALKING ALL THE TIME BUT WE
DON'T REQUIRE ANYBODY TO COME
IN BECAUSE IF SOMEBODY DOESN'T
WANT TO COME IN THEY'RE JUST
NOT GOING TO COME.
>> BUT I WILL SAY WITH THAT
SAID, WE DID MOVE TO A LOW
BARRIER REMODEL IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN AND WHAT THAT DOES IS
WE DON'T TEST FOR DRUGS AND
ALCOHOL WHEN SOMEONE COMES IN
IT'S ALL BEHAVIOR BASED STILL
MAKE SURE IT'S SAFE.
WE STILL MAKE SURE THAT IF
SOMEBODY IF IT'S UNSAFE FOR
THEMSELVES OR OTHERS THEN WE
FIND OTHER ACCOMMODATIONS BUT
AS LONG AS IT'S SAFE WE ASKED
FOLKS TO COME IN AND I THINK
SINCE THAT'S HAPPENED
THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT HAVE BEEN
ON THE STREETS IN THOSE COLD
MONTHS HAS GONE DOWN.
WE HAVE TWO MORE COUNCIL
MEMBERS IN QUEUE IN ABOUT SIX
MINUTES LEFT.
>> SO COUNCIL MEMBER WHATSO UM
MY QUESTION MY FIRST ON MY
QUESTION WAS PRETTY SIMILAR TO
LISA'S BUT I BUT SIMILARLY I
THINK FOR DAN AND AMANDA ARE WE
SEEING AN IMPACT OF THE CITY'S
SUPPORTIVE CONNECTIONS PROGRAM
THAT IS SUPPOSED TO PROVIDE
SOME ASSISTANCE TO PEOPLE IN
THE DOWNTOWN, DIRECT THEM TO
SERVICES AND WHAT OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS ARE PROVIDING
KIND OF THE I'D SAY SUPPORTIVE
SERVICES AND MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES FOR PEOPLE EITHER IN
SHELTER OR STAYING WITH SHELTER
PARTNERS BECAUSE I KNOW THAT A
FEW SHELTER PARTNERS HAVE
ACTUALLY DROPPED OUT BECAUSE
OF , YOU KNOW, PROPERTY DAMAGE
,JUST DIFFERENT ISSUES THAT
THEY'RE HAVING.
>> BUT WHAT SERVICES CAN WE
OFFER TO KIND OF MAKE IT EASIER
FOR PEOPLE ON THESE SITES TO
ACCESS CARE WHEN THEY'RE GOING
THROUGH KIND OF CRISIS?
>> YEAH, IT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
THE FIRST QUESTION WE DO WORK
CLOSELY WITH SUPPORTIVE
CONNECTIONS.
ONE OF OUR STAFF, OUR HOUSING
COORDINATORS LIAISON THEY I
THINK THEY HAVE A WEEKLY
MEETING I THINK WHERE THEY MEET
AND I REALLY THAT'S ABOUT
TRIAGING REALLY DIFFICULT CASES
AS YOU SAID COUNCIL MEMBER, THE
FOLKS WHO ARE REALLY STRUGGLING
AND THAT'S OFTEN A SMALL
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE THAT ARE
REALLY HAVING A DIFFICULT TIME.
THEY'RE GOING THROUGH THAT
ACUTE CRISIS.
THEY'RE DEALING WITH A WHOLE
MYRIAD OF THINGS.
MAYBE IT'S A DUAL DIAGNOSIS
MENTAL HEALTH AND PHYSICAL
HEALTH, MAYBE SUBSTANCE USE AS
WELL.
SO WHERE THE SUPPORT
OF CONNECTIONS COMES, THERE'S A
MEETING AND THERE'S
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE
VARIOUS PARTNERS.
>> I WANT TO SAY S.O.S A FEW
OTHER HOUSING PROVIDERS ARE
INVOLVED THAT AS WELL AS WELL
AS THE SHELTER AND THEN I THINK
ON THE END OF HOW DO WE PROVIDE
MORE WRAPAROUND SUPPORT FOR
FOLKS, I THINK IT'S THINGS LIKE
THAT.
WE ONE THING THAT I'VE TALKED
ABOUT WITH CUSTOMER BRIGS IN A
FEW OTHER FOLKS WHO'VE COME OUT
IS RECENTLY IS MAYBE MORE
RESOURCES FOR THOSE REALLY HIGH
NEED INDIVIDUALS.
WE NEED MORE TRAINING FOR THE
STAFF THAT'S WORKING WITH THEM
AND LOWER CASE CASE LOADS AND
RATIOS FOR THOSE FOLKS THAT
WOULD BE HELPFUL.
IT'S VERY RESOURCE INTENSIVE.
THE INVESTMENT FROM THE CITY,
FROM THE EXCISE TAX THAT'S
BEING USED TO SUPPORT THAT.
BUT FURTHER INVESTMENT IN THAT
AREA WOULD BE INCREDIBLY
HELPFUL BECAUSE IT REALLY IS
REALLY IT'S ABOUT 20 PEOPLE AT
A GIVEN TIME MAYBE ON THE
INDIVIDUALS END THAT REALLY
NEED THAT HIGHEST LEVEL OF CARE
AND THEY'RE UNFORTUNATELY
GETTING TRESPASS FROM THE
SHELTER DUE TO ISSUES PERHAPS
THEN WE'RE LETTING THEM BACK IN
WITH OLDBURY WANT TO GET THEM
BACK IN.
WE'RE TRYING TO WORK WITH THEM,
WORK WITH THE PARTNERS, WORK
REALLY CLOSELY WITH CMH.
A LOT OF PETITIONS AND
HOSPITALIZATIONS ARE OCCURRING
BUT WE'RE REALLY TRYING TO WORK
CLOSELY WITH THOSE INDIVIDUALS
TO TRY TO GET THEM THE SUPPORT
THAT THEY NEED.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THAT AND
JUST APPRECIATE ALL THE WORK
YOU'RE DOING.
>> THANKS.
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON.
YOU'RE UP NEXT.
BUT IS THERE GENERAL CONSENSUS
THAT IF WE GO A FEW MINUTES
OVER WE'LL BE OK WITH THAT?
>> AREN'T COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON THANK YOU ALL FOR
BEING HERE FOR ALL THE WORK
THAT YOU DO FOR OUR COMMUNITY.
I HAVE A COUPLE OF THINGS I
THINK YOU MIGHT HAVE BEEN
SPEAKING TO A LITTLE BIT
EARLIER WITH ALL BUT THE COUNTY
IS CONSIDERING A MASTER LEASING
PROGRAM.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU HEARD ABOUT
WELL, I GUESS YOU WOULD HAVE
HEARD ABOUT THIS.
>> SO BASICALLY RENTING
BUILDING OR UNITS YOU KNOW,
OFFERING AFFORDABLE SUBLEASING.
>> IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WOULD
BE REASONABLE FOR ANN ARBOR AS
A STOPGAP UNTIL HOUSING IS
BUILT OR TO MITIGATE IT?
EVICTIONS?
>> IT IS VERY HARD TO DO MASTER
LEASING.
WE DO HAVE SOME OF OUR
NONPROFITS DO MASTER LEASING
S.O.S AND MAP.
I THINK IT'S A CHALLENGING
MODEL.
I THINK IT'S IF THEY'RE WILLING
TO PUT THE RESOURCES ENOUGH
RESOURCES TO IT IT COULD BE
BENEFICIAL.
I WOULDN'T RECOMMEND FOR THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR, THE COUNTY
WANTS TO DO IT.
>> IT PUT RESOURCE TO THEM
HAPPY FOR THEM TO DO THAT.
OK, THANK YOU AND ALSO WANT TO
ASK ABOUT THE I THINK I THINK
THAT OUR HOUSING COMMISSION MAY
HAVE RECEIVED THE HUD GRANT A
COUPLE OF YEARS AGO THAT WAS
SPECIFICALLY TO INCENTIVIZE
LANDLORDS.
CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
WHY?
>> THANK YOU FOR ASKING.
I PUT A NOTE FOR THAT TO SO WE
WERE DESIGNATED WE DIDN'T GET
EXTRA FUNDING BUT ARE
DESIGNATED WHAT'S CALLED A
MOVING TO WORK ORGANIZATION.
IGNORE THE TITLE BUT OURS WAS
RELATED TO INCENTIVIZING
LANDLORDS AND HELPING TENANTS.
SO BASICALLY WE HAVE ALL KINDS
OF FLEXIBILITY.
WE CAN WE OFFER LANDLORD
INCENTIVES TO STAY A LANDLORD
TO BECOME A LANDLORD.
WE CAN PAY FOR SECURITY
DEPOSITS NOW WE CAN PAY FOR
APPLICATION FEES.
WE CAN PAY FOR SUPPORTS.
SO WE HAVE A WHOLE RANGE
OF ITEMS THAT WE USE TO USE OUR
NON PROFIT TO PAY FOR AND NOW
WE CAN USE OUR HUD FUNDS TO PAY
FOR AND THAT'S BEEN SUPER
HELPFUL.
>> GREAT, GREAT.
THANK YOU.
AND THAT STARTED DID THAT STORY
YEAR AND A HALF AGO.
OK YEAH OK THANK YOU.
I THINK I THINK THAT MAYBE WELL
I KIND OF TO PIGGYBACK ON ON
WHAT COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON WAS
ASKING ABOUT IN TERMS OF YOU
KNOW SOMEBODY WHO NEEDS THAT
EXTRA THAT SMALLER POPULATION
THAT REALLY NEEDS THAT EXTRA
SUPPORT.
CAN YOU SPEAK TO I MEAN I KNOW
THAT WE APPROPRIATED THE SOME
OF THE TEXAS TAX MONEY BUT CAN
YOU KIND OF SPEAK TO THE NEED
OF THAT AND HOW YOU KNOW, MAYBE
I GUESS I'M THINKING ABOUT
FUTURE BUDGET CYCLES AND YEAH,
JUST THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
I THINK I KNOW AND I'M A MEMBER
OF THAT COUNCIL HAS PROPOSED
THAT I DON'T WE DON'T HAVE I
THINK PART OF OUR WORK AS WE
PILOTED THIS NEW EFFORT THAT
WE'RE DOING AND THE CONTINUED
SUPPORT OF CONNECTIONS BETTER
UNDERSTANDING THE NEEDS OF THAT
GROUP AND HOW TO BEST SERVE
THEM IS THIS THIS IS FOLKS WHO
MAY EVEN HAVE BEEN REMOVED FROM
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING IN THEIR
SITE.
WE'RE TRYING TO GET THEM OUT
OF THAT CYCLE I THINK WITH
BETTER UNDERSTAND THE PROBLEM
BUT I I THINK THAT'S THE PLAN
IS TO UNDERSTAND HOW TO WORK
WITH THAT GROUP.
IN THE END IT'S GOING TO BE
MORE TRAINING, LESS CASE LOADS
DEEP DEEPLY INVESTED RESOURCES
AND ALSO A MULTI-SECTOR SUPPORT
.
SO IT'S NOT JUST HOMELESSNESS
AND HOUSING, IT'S WHERE DO WE
BRING IN CMH?
WE'RE BRINGING THE HOSPITAL IN
MICHIGAN MEDICINE AND ST. JOE'S
IF SOMEBODY CYCLING IN AND OUT
OF THE E.R. WHERE WE BRING IN
THE SUBSTANCE USE PROVIDERS,
THAT'S OFTEN AN IMPORTANT PIECE
TO DIVISION OR DON FARMS.
SO I HOPE WE CAN GET MORE
ANSWERS ON THAT SOON.
BUT I THINK IN GENERAL IT'LL BE
JUST HOW DO WE GET MORE STAFF
WORKING IN THAT?
AND ONE THING AT THE SHELTER WE
JUST LAUNCHED WAS A MENTAL
HEALTH COORDINATOR ROLE THAT IS
AT THE CENTER OF THAT AS WELL.
BUT IT'S JUST NOW TAKING OFF.
SO WE'RE WANT TO GIVE IT SOME
TIME TO SEE THE EFFICACY, THE
PROGRAM AND WHAT THE OTHER
NEEDS ARE.
>> OK, AND I MEANT TO MENTION
THE TRAUMA INFORM MORE TRAUMA
INFORMED CASE MANAGEMENT
DEFINITELY TRAUMA INFORMED THAT
WE WANT IT WE WANT IT TO BE
MORE TRAINING FOR THE COMMUNITY
AROUND TRAUMA INFORMED CARE AND
HARM REDUCTION.
YEAH.
AND HOW DO WE SUPPORT FOLKS AND
ALSO NOT RE TRAUMATIZE THEM
WHEN THEY'RE GOING THROUGH THIS
HORRIBLE CRISIS BECAUSE AT THE
SHELTER ONE OF OUR TEAM MEMBERS
WILL TALK ABOUT IT AS LIKE THE
PRINCIPAL ON STEROIDS.
IT'S NOT EVEN THE 80 20 RULE
IT'S THE NINETY FIVE FIVE
REALLY A FIVE PERCENT OF PEOPLE
THAT REALLY ARE HAVING THE MOST
CHALLENGES AND REALLY NEED THAT
THE HIGHER LEVEL OF SUPPORT TO
REALLY GET THEM BACK ON THEIR
FEET.
SO YEAH, IT HAS TO BE TRAUMA
INFORMED.
IT HAS TO BE USED MOTIVATIONAL
INTERVIEWING AND MAKE SURE YOU
STRONGLY TRAIN THE TEAM AND I
LIKE THE EDUCATING THE
COMMUNITY BECAUSE WE REALLY WE
WANT TO KEEP PEOPLE FROM GOING
TO JAIL FOR RIGHT.
AND WE YOU KNOW, I THINK
EDUCATING THE COMMUNITY AROUND
STIGMA AND JUST I THINK THAT'S
VERY IMPORTANT.
>> RIGHT.
SO YEAH.
>> OK, THANK YOU TOTALLY.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
UM I'M GOING TO ASK ONE REALLY
QUICK QUESTION BUT I DON'T MEAN
TO PUT YOU ON THE SPOT.
I THINK THIS IS FOR YOU MASEL
BUT IF YOU WOULD ACTUALLY JUST
MAYBE COMMIT TO FOLLOWING BACK
UP WITH US ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES THAT YOU MENTIONED A
NUMBER OF THE CHALLENGES YOU
MENTIONED ARE A LITTLE OUTSIDE
OF OUR SCOPE AND BROADER TO
KIND OF THE DEVELOPMENT MARKET
IN GENERAL.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT YOU
MENTIONED WAS SOME OF THE CITY
CODES AND CITY FEES AND THE
REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT THAT WE
DO HAVE SOME CONTROL OVER.
AND I WONDER IF MAYBE YOU COULD
FOLLOW BACK UP WITH SOME OF THE
SPECIFIC CHALLENGES THAT YOU
FACE THAT WE MIGHT WANT TO
CONSIDER AS WE CONTINUE WITH
OUR WORK IN POLICYMAKING IN THE
FUTURE TO TO THE EXTENT THAT WE
CAN MAYBE EASE SOME OF THOSE
BURDENS.
>> BUT I HEATHER CYPHERS WAS
WORKING WITH JOHN FORTIER ON
COMING UP WITH A RECOMMENDED SO
I CAN CHECK BACK WITH HIM.
I KNOW SHE INTERVIEWED MYSELF
AND OTHERS AND PUT TOGETHER A
START A DRAFT OF THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
>> UM, ONE FINAL THOUGHT FROM
COUNCIL MEMBERS ON FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING VILLAGE
THERE WAS A CAP OF 20 PERCENT
GOING TOWARDS SUPPORTIVE
SERVICES.
UM, I'M WONDERING, YOU KNOW,
THE HOUSING COMMISSION HAD
RELEASED THIS AMAZING REPORT
LAST YEAR SAYING THAT WE BEAT
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE AND BEING
ABLE TO HOUSE FOLKS FOR A YEAR
OR LONGER 97 PERCENT.
RIGHT.
WHO ARE FORMALLY ANNOUNCED A
NATIONAL AVERAGE IS 86 PERCENT
IF WE UNCAP THAT 20 PERCENT AND
LEAVE IT TO I DON'T KNOW,
CHANGING NEEDS, CHANGING
ENVIRONMENT, MORE FOLKS WHO ARE
NEEDING EMERGENCY HOUSING WOULD
THAT BE SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE
HELPFUL TO YOU?
BECAUSE I I WASN'T ON COUNCIL.
>> THIS CAP WAS WHAT I
UNCALCULATING.
>> I CAN'T REMEMBER ANYTHING
OF THE SUMMER BEFORE.
OKAY.
BACK IN JUST A FEW MINUTES.
UM, RIGHT NOW LESS THAN 10
PERCENT IS USED FOR SERVICES
AND THAT'S OK IN THAT YOU NEED
THE HOUSING TO BE BUILT FIRST
AND SO IT'S GOING TO BE HEAVIER
MORE THAN TWENTY PERCENT
TOWARDS
THE END OF THOSE
MILLAGE AND MUCH LESS AT THE
FRONT.
SO I WOULD I THINK I THINK
WE'RE TOO WE HAVEN'T GOTTEN FAR
ENOUGH INTO KIND OF UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE NEEDS WILL BE YET.
I WOULD RATHER SEE A COUNTYWIDE
MENTAL HEALTH MILLAGE
ADDITIONAL RE UPPED IN A YEAR
OR TWO WHENEVER IT IS TO BE
TOWARD SERVICES MYSELF.
THANKS ALL THREE OF YOU FOR
BEING HERE AND FOR ANSWERING
QUESTIONS FOR US.
>> WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC
COMMENT GENERAL TIME AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO ADDRESS COUNCIL.
>> YOU DON'T NEED TO HAVE
SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT IF
THERE IS ANYONE HERE FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT PLEASE FEEL FREE TO
APPROACH THE PODIUM
SEEING NO
ONE IN HOUSE JUMPING AT THE
OPPORTUNITY.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ON LINE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS
COUNCIL?
WE DO.
MAYOR JEFF HAYNER, DID YOU HAVE
A COMMENT STAR SIX ON YOURSELF
?
YEAH, NOT HERE.
THIS IS ME.
MAYBE IT'S ME.
OH YEAH RIGHT.
HI MY NAME'S JEFF ER WARD ONE
BOY THERE'S A LOT TO SAY ABOUT
THE TOPIC I ALWAYS LIKE TO SEE
AGAIN PRESENTATION
OF PRESENTATION YOU KNOW PART
OF IT OF COURSE LIKE WHEN WE
SAY MOST APPROACHES ARE NOT
UTILIZED IN ANN ARBOR.
I MEAN IT'S AN ODD TWIST THERE
THAT WE'RE FUNDING THEM BUT THE
PEOPLE ARE LIVING ELSEWHERE.
THAT'S OK.
THAT'S WHAT NEED BE IT REALLY
PLANNING AND PLANNING FOR THE
UN HOW SHOULD BE A REGIONAL
MATTER?
>> OF COURSE THE BIGGEST
QUESTION I GET WHEN I TALK TO
NEIGHBORS IS HOW DID IT COME TO
BE THAT THE FIRST YEARS
RECEIPT'S IN THE VILLAGE THAT
SIX MILLION PLUS DOLLARS
BASICALLY BOUGHT A PIECE
OF PROPERTY THAT THE CITY
ALREADY OWNED?
AND OF COURSE I HEARD THE
EXPLANATION BUT MOST PEOPLE
DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT FINANCIAL
TRANSACTION THAT WENT ON THERE
AND FEEL LIKE IT WAS A MAJOR
SETBACK FOR THAT FUND.
>> I SEE THE MAYOR'S NOT HERE
AND HE SHOULD HE SHOULD BE
ASHAMED TO BE THERE AND SO
BECAUSE SINCE TOUCHED IN OUR
POLITICS THE PERCENTAGE
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT IS
AVAILABLE IN OUR COMMUNITY HAS
GONE DOWN.
IT GOES DOWN YEAR AFTER YEAR
AFTER YEAR AND I HAVE LONG
ADVOCATED FOR LOOKING AT OUR
NEEDS FOR HOUSING AS A
PERCENTAGE OF THE WHOLE AND I
THINK WE DID THAT WE'D SEE
REALLY HOW FAR IN THE HOLE WE
ARE WHAT COMES TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
AND I ALSO KNOW THAT I WAS
STONEWALLED WHEN I TRIED TO GET
THE CITY TO DROP THE VARIOUS
FEES THAT WE CHARGE OUR HOUSING
COMMISSION FOR BUILDING NEW
PROPERTIES.
>> I WILL BE SHOCKED IF WE DO
ANY INCLUSIONARY ZONING BECAUSE
THERE'S BEEN NO INDICATION THAT
THIS COUNCIL IS INTERESTED IN
THAT IN ONE OR THE OTHER ZONING
CHANGES THAT ARE BEING RUSHED
IN UNDER THE CONSIDERATION
OF OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THIS PLAN.
>> I'M ALSO DISAPPOINTED TO
HEAR THAT THERE MAY BE MOVING
FORWARD.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WE DID SOME
GOOD AND MISLEADING SAID IT
WHEN WE ASKED HER TO EVALUATE
THE VARIOUS CITY ON PROPERTIES
FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND NOW
WE'RE LOOKING AT SOME KIND
OF SOME KIND CARTER CENTER IN A
BACKROOM DEAL AND THAT'S NO
GOOD.
DON'T GO OUT DISAPPOINT.
WELL, MANY THINGS.
BUT ONE THING I WAS
DISAPPOINTED WAS TO SEE THE
CONSIDERATION NIMBYISM IS
SOMEHOW HOPE THAT THE QUEST FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING I MEAN THE
FACT THAT WE NOW HAVE A MILLAGE
THAT OUR TAXES WENT UP AND
WE'RE ALL PAYING FOR THAT I
THINK THE OPPOSITE AND HONESTLY
THE BIGGEST AD THE SEES THAT I
HAVE SEEN IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS HAS BEEN TO GET MORE
INCLUSIONARY ZONING AND WE NEED
LOOK NO FURTHER THAN THE NINE
MILLION THAT WE LEFT ON THE
TABLE WITH THE LOWERTOWN DEAL
BY GIVING FAVORABLE
OF FAVORABLE ZONING AND SO I
THINK I THINK WE NEED TO LOSE
THAT PEJORATIVE TERM IN OUR IN
THE FUTURE.
>> I GUESS ONE LAST THING I
WOULD SAY IS A LOT OF OUR
SOCIAL SERVICE MONEY IN FACT I
THINK THE MAJORITY OF IT GOES
TO ABBERLINE AND I KNOW THERE'S
SOME CONCERNS ABOUT SOCIAL
SERVICES AND YOU EVEN MENTIONED
HOW THE INSURANCE GOES.
YOUR FIRE INSURANCE WENT UP
BECAUSE THE FIRE MILLION MAN
AND AVALON EVERYONE HAS AN
ABOLITIONIST STANCE TOWARD
THEIR POLICE AND I BELIEVE THAT
ANY SOCIAL SERVICES THAT GET
MONEY FROM THE CITY NEED TO
WORK WITH.
>> THANK YOU.
THAT'S TIME.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
SPEAKERS HERE FOR TIME?
>> I DON'T SEE ANY OTHER
CALLERS ON THE LINE WITH THEIR
HANDS UP.
ALL RIGHT.
SEE NO NO.
THEIR CALLERS PUBLIC COMMENT IS
CLOSED.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY
COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNSEL?
COUNCILMAN WINDBREAKS SINCE WE
RAN OUT OF QUESTION TIME
EARLIER I JUST FORM THIS PUT
THIS IN THE FORM OF A COMMENT
WHICH WAS WHEN THANK YOU FOR
FOR BEING HERE FOR PROVIDING
THIS INFORMATION, FOR GIVING US
A STRONG FOUNDATION TO BE ABLE
TO WORK FROM AND ALSO TO
PRESENT BACK TO THE COMMUNITY
AND ALSO BASED ON SOME OF THE
FOLLOW UP QUESTIONS TO SOME
OF MINE.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE IT'S
CLEAR THAT I AM VERY PROUD
OF THE THE THE SUPPORT THAT THE
ANIBA COMMUNITY IS PLACING AND
INVESTING IN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
THERE IS A LOT OF AND WE AS FAR
AS I'M AWARE, WE'RE THE ONLY
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN WASHINGTON
COUNTY AND PERHAPS MONROE
COUNTY AS WELL THAT INVESTING
WITH THIS LEVEL OF RESOURCE
INTO AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND SO
GIVEN THE FINANCING NEEDS FOR
THIS, IT WOULD BE GREAT TO SEE
MORE SEE MORE COMMUNITIES
COMING TO THE TABLE TO HELP TO
HELP SUPPORT THE GREAT NEED.
BUT I'M GLAD THAT THAT WE ARE
BUILDING THE HOUSING BUILDING
HOUSING HERE AND THAT SO MUCH
OF IT IS IN THE FIFTH WARD.
>> IT'S GOOD.
THANKS.
>> AND THE OTHER COUNCIL MEMBER
COMMENTS BUT SEEING NONE I
THINK THAT WE ARE ADJOURNED